Loss estimation for landslides in mountain areas eAn integrated
toolbox for vulnerability assessment and damage documentation
M. Papathoma-K €ohlea,*, A. Zischgb, S. Fuchsc, T. Gladea, M. Keilerd
aDepartment of Geography and Regional Research, University of Vienna, Universit €atsstrasse 7, 1010 Vienna, Austria
bInstitute of Geography and Oeschger Centre for Climate Change Research, Mobiliar Lab for Natural Risks, University of Bern, Hallerstrasse 12, CH-30 12
Bern, Switzerland
cInstitute of Mountain Risk Engineering, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Peter-Jordan-Strasse 82, 1190 Vienna, Austria
dInstitute of Geography, University of Bern, Hallerstrasse 12, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland
article info
Article history:
Received 19 February 2014Received in revised form25 September 2014Accepted 6 October 2014Available online 30 October 2014
Keywords:
Loss estimationVulnerabilityDamage assessmentLandslides
Documentationabstract
Global environmental change includes changes in a wide range of global scale phenomena, which are
expected to affect a number of physical processes, as well as the vulnerability of the communities thatwill experience their impact. Decision-makers are in need of tools that will enable them to assess the loss
of such processes under different future scenarios and to design risk reduction strategies. In this paper, a
tool is presented that can be used by a range of end-users (e.g. local authorities, decision makers, etc.) forthe assessment of the monetary loss from future landslide events, with a particular focus on torrential
processes. The toolbox includes three functions: a) enhancement of the post-event damage data
collection process, b) assessment of monetary loss of future events and c) continuous updating andimprovement of an existing vulnerability curve by adding data of recent events. All functions of the tool
are demonstrated through examples of its application.
©2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Disaster costs are increasing globally. According to the European
Environment Agency (EEA), as far as weather and climate related
events are concerned, only in Europe and despite all the counter
measures which have been taken, the overall damages have
increased from EUR 9 billion in the 1980s, to more than EUR 13
billion in the 2000s ( EEA, 2012 ). This is primarily due to increases in
population, economic wealth and human activities in hazard-prone
areas, as well as better reporting ( EEA, 2012; Keiler, 2013 ). Ac-
cording to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC,
2012 ), the nature and the severity of the consequences following
the occurrence of climate extremes or other hazardous phenomena
depends not only on the process itself but also on the exposure and
vulnerability of the elements at risk ( Fig. 1 ). Climate change is
responsible for changes in the frequency and magnitude of natural
processes ( Keiler et al., 2010 ), or actually, for changes in the inputs
and the effect of processes (e.g. rainfall as an input to the process of
ﬂooding) and partially also for the occurrence locality, however,socio-economic changes also result in alterations of the spatial and
temporal pattern of exposure ( Fuchs et al., 2005, 2013 ) and
vulnerability ( Fuchs et al., 2012a; Keiler et al., 2012 ). Therefore,
strategies for risk reduction should not only focus on hazardous
process and structural protection works, but also, on reducing the
exposure and vulnerability of the exposed system. Consequently,
appropriate tools are needed so that scientists, authorities and
other stakeholders may assess the possible loss under different
future scenarios ( Papathoma-K €ohle et al., 2011 ). According to IPCC
(2012) , vulnerability is a key factor in disaster losses; however, it is
not yet well accounted for, since data on disasters at the local level
are limited ( Totschnig and Fuchs, 2013 ) and thus, improvements in
local vulnerability reduction are constrained.
There have been numerous debates regarding the de ﬁnition of
“vulnerability ”, since the speci ﬁc term is used in various ways by
scientists of different scienti ﬁc backgrounds such as natural sci-
entists, engineers, social scientists and climate change researchers
(Glade (2003), Füssel (2007), Fuchs (2009), Hufschmidt and Glade
(2010), Birkmann et al. (2013), Ciurean et al. (2013) ). In natural
science and as far as physical vulnerability is concerned, the most
common de ﬁnition of vulnerability is the one that was introduced
by UNDRO (United Nations Disaster Relief Organisation) in 1984 :
“the degree of loss to a given element, or set of elements, within the
area affected by a hazard. It is expressed on a scale of 0 (no loss) to 1*Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: maria.papathoma@gmail.com ,maria.papathoma@univie.ac.at
(M. Papathoma-K €ohle).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Environmental Modelling & Software
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/envsoft
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2014.10.003
1364-8152/ ©2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Environmental Modelling & Software 63 (2015) 156 e169
(total loss) ’’. There is no universal method for assessing vulnera-
bility ( Fuchs et al., 2011 ); nevertheless, there are three dominant
methods for assessing and assign values to it: vulnerability
matrices ( Papathoma-K €ohle et al., 2012b ), vulnerability indicators
(Birkmann et al., 2013 ) and vulnerability curves ( Fuchs et al., 2007a;
Totschnig et al., 2011 ).
The use of vulnerability curves is common in the case of hazards
that affect larger areas and a considerable number of buildings (e.g.
ﬂoods and earthquakes, Apel et al., 2009 ). In these cases, the in-
tensity of the process (water depth and ground acceleration
respectively) can be assessed relatively easy for each building.
Moreover, the reliability of the curve is high due to a rather high
amount of available data. It is worth mentioning though, that a
comparison of parametric (using indicators) and physically based
modelling techniques (using curves) regarding ﬂood vulnerability
assessment showed that the parametric approaches are the most
appropriate ( Balica et al., 2013 ). Nevertheless, the authors of the
speci ﬁc comparative study indicated also the drawbacks of the
parametric methods, such as high data requirements and high
levels of uncertainty ( Balica et al., 2013 ). On the other hand, for
some types of hazards, such as rock falls or debris ﬂows, the
deduction of vulnerability curves is dif ﬁcult due to the limited
number of available damage data ( Uzielli et al., 2008 ), the challenge
in assessing the intensity of the process on individual buildings
(Mazzorana and Fuchs, 2010 ) and the gaps in understanding the
interaction between the process and the affected elements.
As far as debris ﬂow and ﬂuvial sediment transport (as one large
group of landslides) are concerned, the main disadvantage of the
vulnerability curves is the lack of reliable empirical data regarding
building loss ( Fuchs et al., 2012b; Papathoma-K €ohle et al., 2012a, b ).
Although recently an increasing amount of studies focussing on
vulnerability curves for this type of hazard can be found in the
literature (see Fuchs et al., 2007a; Totschnig et al., 2011;
Papathoma-K €ohle et al., 2011 for an overview), these curves are
mostly based on a limited amount of data related to building
damages since such damages are rarely documented in detail (per
building) or the information is not available due to e.g. data pro-
tection legislation. A second disadvantage is that, in order to
develop a curve, information on the intensity of the process on adetailed scale (intensity per building) is necessary. However, this
information is challenging to be recorded and expressed since the
intensity of a process depends on more than one factor ( Keiler,
2011 ). For example, in the case of debris ﬂow, the intensity is
often expressed as the debris deposition height, although more
factors, such as velocity, viscosity, pressure, direction and duration
of impact might in ﬂuence the overall intensity of the process ( Jakob
et al., 2012 ). Additionally, the process behaviour may change as it
progresses over time and in space. Due to the temporal and spatial
variability of sediment concentration during individual events the
dominant process in the central part of the deposition zone is
regularly used to de ﬁne the entire event characteristics ( Hungr
et al., 2001 ). Moreover, the buildings that are considered for the
development of a vulnerability curve should have similar charac-
teristics. These characteristics, however, will not be fully considered
in their assessment of vulnerability ( Holub et al., 2012 ). This means
that the computation of the curve provides us with informationregarding the potential loss rather than information on how this
loss can be reduced. Another important issue is the transferability
of the method. Vulnerability curves developed for European
mountain regions may be applied to other parts of the world only if
the type of housing is similar to the one that was used for the
development of the original curve ( Fuchs et al., 2012c; Lo et al.,
2012 ). In any other case, a new vulnerability curve has to be
developed. Moreover, existing curves are based on reported (often
tangible) damage and not comprehensively on a broader damage
deﬁnition (e.g., with respect to tangible and intangible losses). It is,
however, almost impossible to validate them ( Meyer et al., 2013 ).
For this reason, it is clear that there is a need for better detailed
reporting of damages at local scale. Finally, vulnerability curves eif
derived empirically ehave to be regularly updated with data on
losses from recent events, and to be consequently adjusted to the
increased basic population. In order to achieve this goal, hence,
there is an urge for automatisation in the ﬁeld of damage recording.
On the other hand, the advantage of the vulnerability curves,
and the main reason why they are so popular among practitioners,
is that they offer a quantitative rather than a qualitative result. By
using vulnerability curves the potential economic loss may be
expressed as an approximate value in relationship to the expected
Fig. 1. Key concepts of disaster risk management and their interaction (modi ﬁed from IPCC, 2012 ).M. Papathoma-K €ohle et al. / Environmental Modelling & Software 63 (2015) 156 e169 157
hazard intensity for each element at risk ( Kienholz et al., 2004 ). For
this reason, vulnerability values may describe the susceptibility of
elements at risk facing different natural processes with different
spatial and temporal distributions of process intensities (e.g., ﬂow
depths, accumulation heights, ﬂow velocities and pressures).
Practitioners can use the results of vulnerability curves not only to
assess the ﬁnancial costs of future events under different scenarios,
but also for cost bene ﬁt analysis for protection measures (e.g., Fuchs
et al., 2007b; Markantonis et al., 2012; Fuchs, 2013 ) and for the
impact assessment of alternative risk reduction strategies, such as
land use planning ( Greiving et al., 2006 ) or local structural pro-
tection ( Holub and Fuchs, 2009 ).
In this paper, an innovative toolbox for assessing the loss of
potential future landslide events is presented. The toolbox uses a
vulnerability curve based on local past damage data in order to
assess the monetary loss of future events and at the same time is
targeted at reducing the disadvantages mentioned above. The new
toolbox has three functions (tools): 1) it ensures the automatisation
of the recording of damages in an ef ﬁcient way by supporting the
damage documentation process after an event, 2) it can assess the
monetary loss of potential future events, and 3) it improves andupdates the curve by the inclusion of new damage data and a re-
computation of the curve. Moreover, information on the condi-
tion and characteristics of the buildings is also recorded and may be
used in the future to investigate the way that buildings with
different characteristics react on the impact of debris ﬂows or other
torrential hazards.
2. State of the art
Loss estimation models have been developed in the past for
various hazard types. The last decades, advances in information
technology have signi ﬁcantly improved their functionality.
Bendimerad (2001) suggests that loss estimation tools rely on the
availability of two large datasets: data regarding the hazard itself
(including information on the geology, geomorphology, soil con-
ditions etc.) and data regarding the elements at risk (inventory of
buildings and infrastructure, economic value of the elements, etc.).
Bendimerad (2001) , who focuses mainly on loss estimation tools
for earthquake hazards, recognises also the central role of vulner-
ability curves within these tools. He de ﬁnes these curves (some-
times referred to also as fragility curves) as “the functional
relationship that provides the probability to reach or exceed a
damage level as a function of the (earthquake) severity ”. Finally, in
the same study the advantages and possible uses of loss estimation
tools are also listed: (1) accessibility (they can be used also by non-
experts), (2) scenario analyses (the impact of different scenarios
may be investigated), (3) special focus analyses (the focus may be
on speci ﬁc elements at risk or their components), and (4) cus-
tomised applications (applications may be de ﬁned in order to
satisfy speci ﬁc user needs). In a review of methods for assessing the
costs of natural hazards (including alpine hazards, drought, ﬂoods
and coastal hazards), Meyer et al. (2013) underline the need for cost
assessments for natural hazards, because they can be a powerfultool in the hands of decision makers, as well as insurance com-
panies. They suggest that there is a variety of methods and termi-
nologies for the estimation of costs related to natural hazards. As far
as terminology is concerned, a glossary for cost categories was
developed within the CONHAZ project. The CONHAZ project and
cost assessments in general often include a variety of costs types
(e.g. direct costs, business interruption costs, indirect costs, intan-
gible costs or even risk mitigation costs). However, in the present
paper the focus is clearly on direct costs related to property damage
due to the direct physical contact with the hazard ( Smith and Ward,
1998 ;i n Meyer et al., 2013 ). Regarding direct costs, the review(Meyer et al., 2013 ) refers also to the damage functions (elsewhere
referred to also as fragility or vulnerability functions) for single or
multi parameters as the most frequently applied method for cost
assessment. They suggest that the functions may take into account
one or more parameters. A thorough review of damage/vulnera-
bility functions especially for alpine hazards ( ﬂoods, landslides,
rock falls and snow avalanches) is also provided by Papathoma-
K€ohle et al. (2011) . Particularly for torrent hazards, a considerable
number of vulnerability curves can be found in the literature. For
example, Fuchs et al. (2007a) based on damage data from a debris
ﬂow event in Austria computed a vulnerability curve, Akbas et al.
(2009) applied a similar method in Italy and Totschnig et al.
(2011) modi ﬁed the approach introducing the term “relative in-
tensity ”(intensity expressed as debris height in relation to building
height). Moreover, Papathoma-K €ohle et al. (2012a) computed a
vulnerability curve for the valley of Martell, which was later
improved by including additional data from debris ﬂow events in
South Tyrol, Italy ( Papathoma-K €ohle et al., 2012b ). Finally, Quan
Luna et al. (2011) , based on intensity information derived by nu-
merical modelling, provided three vulnerability curves for debris
ﬂows expressing intensity, not only as deposit height, but also as
impact pressure and kinematic viscosity respectively.
There is an overall (and empirically-based) conclusion that low
process intensities result in low damage ratios and, therefore, low
vulnerability, whereas high process intensities result in high
damage ratios and consequently high vulnerabilities (e.g.,
Totschnig and Fuchs, 2013 ). Nevertheless, there is only limited in-
formation available on spatial characteristics of vulnerability
within the concept of risk ( Fuchs et al., 2012b ). As far as medium
process intensities are concerned, it is evident that damage asso-
ciated with medium process intensities (deposit height 1 e2m )
may vary signi ﬁcantly ( Fuchs et al., 2007a; Totschnig et al., 2011 ).
Therefore, there may be a dependency other than between process
intensity and the damage ratio of the buildings exposed. It has been
shown that the spatial distribution of geographical locations with
either high or low damage ratios is not only an effect of changing
process intensities, but also an outcome of the general land use
pattern on each individual torrent fan, and the overall constructive
characteristics of the elements at risk ( Fuchs et al., 2012b ). Never-
theless, a further analysis of data, such as the type and year of
construction, would enrich our understanding beyond space; such
information would be of particular interest with respect to the
overall discussion on multi-temporal and spatial assessment of risk
(Fuchs and Bründl, 2005; Keiler et al., 2005, 2006; Zischg et al.,
2005 ) and with respect to advances in multi-temporal vulnera-
bility assessments ( Fuchs et al., 2011; Papathoma-K €ohle et al., 2011 )
and multi-hazard vulnerability studies ( Kappes et al., 2012a, b ).
A wide variety of different approaches is available for the
assessment of hazard, risk and vulnerability. In the literature, in-
dividual studies may be found that set their focus on vulnerability
models and loss estimation. Most of them aim at the development
of tools and maps to provide information for or to support decision
making of stakeholders involved in natural hazard mitigation. An
example is the study of Samarasinghe and Strickert (2013) that
developed fuzzy cognitive maps for adaptive policy formulation for
earthquakes in mountain ski areas, allowing the participation of thestakeholders in the modelling process. Another example of
participatory modelling is the study of Giupponi et al. (2013) . They
developed a tool for ﬂood hazards that explores and communicates
vulnerability to ﬂoods and climate change to stakeholders, such as
representatives of public administrators, businesses and NGOs. The
stakeholders of this study may actively participate by identifying
the most relevant issues to be considered as input variables to the
model. However, the speci ﬁc tool considers a range of indicators
that are relevant to many vulnerability dimensions (e.g. social) andM. Papathoma-K €ohle et al. / Environmental Modelling & Software 63 (2015) 156 e169 158
not only physical. On the other hand, there are studies and tools
that concentrate not only on vulnerability but also on the hazard
itself, such as a model developed by Serra et al. (2013) for wild ﬁres
in Spain. The model is focussing on the extent of clustering of
wildﬁres and the development of risk maps that may provide a tool
for preventing and managing vulnerability levels. In the literature,
the elements at risk are usually the built environment and the
population, however, there also studies concentrating on agricul-
ture (e.g. Pogson et al., 2012 ). Last but not least, apart from a range
of natural hazards, similar models have been also developed for
man-made or technological hazards such as transportation of
dangerous goods ( Tena-Chollet et al., 2013 ).
Besides individual studies of different vulnerability assessments
or loss estimation methodologies for speci ﬁc hazards and areas,
there are also loss estimation tools that include data for more than
one hazard, as well as inventories for larger areas or countries such
as the HAZUS model (USA), RiskScape (New Zealand), EconoMe
(Switzerland) and CAPRA (Latin America).
HAZUS (Hazards United States) is a GIS (Geographic Informa-
tion System) based on a loss estimation software package devel-
oped by FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) for theUSA that can identify and pro ﬁle hazards, as well as estimating the
losses and possible mitigation options considering the elements at
risk in the hazardous areas. HAZUS contains inventories of build-
ings, essential facilities, transportation and utility facilities, as well
as vehicles and agricultural products. It uses damage curves that
can be chosen or developed by the user. HAZUS provides loss
estimation for hurricanes, earthquakes and ﬂoods ( Scawthorn
et al., 2006 ).
RiskScape is an integrative risk assessment tool ( Schmidt et al.,
2011 ) which uses fragility functions for modelling risks from
different natural hazards and for various elements at risk. The tool
uses a software prototype for generating fragility functions from
standard mathematical curves. Different types of fragility functions
(empirical curves developed from historical data or synthetic
functions (hypothetical curves) based on expert opinion developed
independently) can be integrated in RiskScape. RiskScape uses a
combination of both re ﬁning and adjusting the initial fragility
curves to the situation for affected regions in New Zealand.
In Switzerland, an online risk assessment calculation tool
EconoMe and its most recent version EconoMe-Develop have been
developed for cost-bene ﬁt analysis of mitigation measures and
have been in operation since 2008. The tool is used mainly for the
prioritisation of mitigation projects by the Federal Of ﬁce of the
Environment (FOEN/BAFU) ( Bründl et al., 2009 ). The speci ﬁc tool is
makes use of ﬁxed (EconoMe) or user de ﬁned scenarios (EconoMe-
Develop) regarding the hazard (avalanches, ﬂoods, debris ﬂows,
rock fall and landslides). The tool provides a calculation of expo-
sure, consequence and risk analysis with and without mitigation
measures ( Bründl, 2012 ).
CAPRA (Comprehensive Approach to Probabilistic Risk Assess-
ment) is a probabilistic risk assessment program developed for
evaluating multi-hazard risk in Latin America. It is composed of
modules of hazards, vulnerability and risk evaluation, as well as
tools for cost bene ﬁt analysis and it is used for decision making. It
provides disaster related information to a number of sectors such ashealth, education, transport, housing etc. ( Marulanda et al., 2013 ).
Loss estimation tools like the ones described above require
detailed damage datasets that may be derived only through
adequate documentation of losses due to disastrous events. One ofthe main sources of uncertainty in the assessment of costs related
to natural hazards is the lack of such datasets that may provide
information not only about the past events and their characteristics
(intensity, duration, extent, etc.), but also about the elements at
risk, their condition prior to the event, the detailed amount ofdamage and the intensity of the process associated with each
damage. In this respect, several authors suggest (e.g. Papathoma-
K€ohle et al., 2012b; Meyer et al., 2013 ) that improvements should
be made in the collection of data following disastrous events and
secondary data sets that may enable the calculation of natural
hazard costs (e.g. object value). Many efforts have been done in the
past for improvement and harmonisation of the collection of post
event data such as DOMODIS ( Hübl et al., 2002 ) and DIS-ALP
(Berger et al., 2007 ), which focused on the documentation of
mountain disasters. However, these initiatives gave an emphasis to
the process and its characteristics rather to the consequences and
detailed documentation of damage. Damage databases have been
also developed by insurers or reinsurers (e.g. NATHAN of Munich Re
and Swiss Re's Sigma; Barredo, 2009 ), as well as by national
administrative bodies (e.g. StorMe; Burren and Eyer, 2000 )a t
different scales. However, StorMe includes information regarding
the event rather its consequences ( Burren and Eyer, 2000 ). At
global level, there is the EM-DAT database which is available on line
and contains data on natural and technological disasters and their
impact (casualties and costs). At national level, there are similar
efforts: in Australia, the research team “Risk Frontiers ”maintains a
database with information regarding natural hazards and their
impacts at national level and countries such as Germany (HOWAS)
and countries from Latin America (DesInventar) also maintain da-
tabases for ﬂood and natural/technological hazards respectively
(Hilker et al., 2009 ). In Switzerland, there is the WSL damage
database ( Hilker et al., 2009 ) which focuses on economic damage
and casualties. The recorded events are then available to of ﬁcial
institutions responsible for land use planning, and protection
measures. The ﬁnancial damage is not only recorded for buildings
but also for infrastructure, protective structures, forest and agri-
cultural land ( Hilker et al., 2009 ). The scale of the damage docu-
mentation is at community level ( Hilker et al., 2009 ). However, to
date, there is no standard for the documentation of losses related to
natural hazards.
In Italy, the collection of natural hazards events and related
information (damages and casualties) is made by means of the IFFI-
system (Italian Landslide Inventory, APAT, 2007 ), particularly for
landslides and rock falls. In the Autonomous Province of Bozen
(South Tyrol), water related hazards and the related damage are
documented by means of the ED30 system (event documentation
for natural hazard events in the Department 30 eHydraulic Engi-
neering) ( Zischg et al., 2007 ). Summarised information regarding
affected persons, damages on buildings and infrastructure is
inserted into the event documentation databases, in most cases
without mentioning monetary values.
The main difference between the tool presented here and the
existing approaches described above is that the presented tool is
working on a local scale in contrast to HAZUS, RiskScape, etc.
Moreover, the presented tool is tailored to the application in the
European Alps due to the underlying loss data. Additionally, the
tool can be used in the ﬁeld by non-experts for rapid damage
documentation and it can also improve itself automatically
(updating of the existing vulnerability curve). However, the tool is
focussing on the elements at risk and their characteristics without
including hazard information (e.g. CAPRA). The presented tool
contains not only damage information, but also (in contrast to
HOWAS in Germany) information regarding characteristics of the
buildings. This information is highly detailed and available on large
scale. It includes information not only on the condition or ﬂoors of
each building but also, on the presence of basement, characteristics
of the surroundings and number, size and quality of openings, that
is hardly available in any other existing database. RiskScape is
currently developing such a database for New Zealand, still, the
building characteristics are not as detailed as the ones presentedM. Papathoma-K €ohle et al. / Environmental Modelling & Software 63 (2015) 156 e169 159
here (RiskScape Website). In the case of HAZUS, information on
elements at risk is collected per Census Block, which, although it is
the smallest geographical unit of the United States it includes
several buildings.
Despite the fact that documentation methods are slowly
improving taking full advantage of the increasingly available
technology and loss estimation tools, there are still gaps to be ﬁlled,
such as scale issues, degree of detail, relationship between damage
pattern and process intensity on individual objects, etc. In order to
address these issues, we have to improve ﬁrst the quality and
reliability of datasets allowing a more reliable assessment of
physical vulnerability. In more detail, there is still the need for
improving the vulnerability input within the risk assessment pro-
cess, increase the quality of damage data and data on elements at
risk, as well as the degree of detail. This can be done by continu-
ously recording the consequences of natural processes adequately
on the built environment. In this way, the interaction between
process and consequences can be better understood and the gained
knowledge may then be used for the design of vulnerability
reduction strategies. The tool presented in this paper contributes
signiﬁcantly to the improvement of these datasets and, conse-
quently, to the improvement of the vulnerability component of the
risk assessment process. In other words, the tool contributes to the
successful capture of damage information and its transfer to valu-
able and reliable datasets that may be used for vulnerability and
risk assessment.
3. The vulnerability function
A vulnerability function was computed based on empirical
damage data of buildings in South Tyrol, Italy, that have suffered
the impact of debris ﬂow or ﬂuvial sediment transport in the past.
Based on event documentation (photos), the heights of the deposits
were estimated and the estimated monetary damage per building
was analysed. The degree of loss per building was also calculated by
comparing the value of the building (in terms of reconstruction
costs) to the monetary damage caused by the event. At the begin-
ning, Papathoma-K €ohle et al. (2012a) conducted a pilot study in the
municipality of Martell. A building-precise assessment of the debris
ﬂow intensities and the monetary loss of most of the affectedbuildings of the 1987 debris ﬂow event in the municipality of
Martell was carried out. Overall, photographic documentation of 53
buildings was used out of the 69 buildings that were damaged or
completely destroyed ( Pﬁtscher, 1996 ), since, only for this amount
of buildings adequate photographic documentation was available.
By using photographic documentation, the extent of damage was
translated into monetary loss, based on standard prices for reno-
vation works ( Kaswalder, 2009 ). The degree of loss for each
building was then assessed, based on the overall building value
(Papathoma-K €ohle et al., 2012a ). In order to improve the curve,
more buildings that suffered damage due to debris ﬂows or ﬂuvial
sediment transport in South Tyrol were added to the curve (52
additional buildings) in a later stage. The ﬁnal curve, including all
the buildings from the Italian Alps, is shown in Fig. 2 (Papathoma-
K€ohle et al., 2012b ).
The vulnerability curve clearly shows that the higher the in-
tensity of the process the greater the damage that an element at
risk suffers. Papathoma-K €ohle et al. (2012a, b) computed also a
validation curve (blue curve in Fig. 2 ) using paid-out compensation
data provided by the Department of Domestic Construction of the
Autonomous Province of Bozen (South Tyrol) for the calculation ofthe degree of loss. The degree of loss for the development of the
validation curve was expressed as the ratio of the estimated object
value and the compensation that the building owners received in
order to restore their building. The intensity values remained the
same as the ones used for the initial vulnerability curve. The vali-
dation curve provided slightly higher degree of loss values for in-
tensities 0 e1.5 m and lower degree of loss values for intensities
1.5e3.5 m.
4. The toolbox
A toolbox was developed to support the risk management
practice in regard to three main aims: (a) improvement of the
damage data collection process on the ﬁeld, (b) assessment of
damage and loss for buildings prone to future events (scenarios),
and (c) improvement of an existing vulnerability curve by using
data of recent events.
Thus, the toolbox has three functions that were implemented as
three separate but interlinked procedures (tools):
Fig. 2. The vulnerability function (blue curve) and the validation function (red curve) for debris ﬂow events in South Tyrol ( Papathoma-K €ohle et al., 2012b ). (For interpretation of
the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)M. Papathoma-K €ohle et al. / Environmental Modelling & Software 63 (2015) 156 e169 160
1. A standardised method for improved and more ef ﬁcient damage
documentation and assessment in the ﬁeld.
2. A method for damage and loss assessment of possible future
events under different land use/hazard scenarios using the
existing vulnerability curve.
3. Updating of the database and improvement of the curve by
including additional empirical and well-documented damagedata from recent events.
The toolbox considers mainly damage on residential buildings
or buildings with similar characteristics without including speci ﬁ-
cations, such as sensitive inventories in industrial buildings. The
three individual tools are connected to each other in terms of data
and output exchange ( Fig. 3 ). A starting menu prompts the user to
the required tool, which is either damage documentation or dam-
age calculation.
Theﬁrst tool (damage documentation) offers a graphical user
interface, which enables the documentation of physical damage on
buildings caused by the impact of torrential hazards. With this tool,
the majority of information regarding detailed damage patterns can
be recorded into a database. On the basis of the input data, a
mathematical function calculates the needed amount of restoration
work and, eventually, the total monetary value of the restoration, as
well as the total value of the building. In the calculation of the
restoration costs, only the construction costs are calculated, based
on the costs of an average building in South Tyrol. Content costs or
special high value building features (e.g. expensive ﬂoors) are not
considered. As a result, the loss ratio can be obtained for every
assessed building. If, at a later stage, information on additional
losses (from another hazard event) becomes available, the system
re-calculates the existing vulnerability curve (third tool: update of
existing curve), in order to take into account an enlarged sample of
buildings and to increase the reliability of the function.
The second tool (loss assessment of future scenarios) calculates
the monetary loss per building for a speci ﬁc hazard scenario on the
basis of the building value and the externally computed expected
process intensity. The potential loss is subsequently calculated us-
ing the internal vulnerability curve, which is continuously updated
by the third tool. Depending on the scale, this function can be used
for individual objects but it can simultaneously be implementedinto a GIS-procedure for loss assessment over wider regions. In thefollowing paragraphs, all three tools of the toolbox are described in
detail.
4.1. Damage documentation tool
Following a debris ﬂow event it is important to estimate the
cumulative damage on buildings and infrastructure. The individual
damage has to be documented and calculated in a short time
window after the event because (a) damage is usually restored as
soon as possible by the local population after the event and (b) the
government needs information about the losses immediately for
priority setting of intervention and restoration works and for the
information of the media. In parallel, insurance companies wouldlike to have an ef ﬁcient instrument for the rapid documentation of
the losses. If a larger area is affected by the event, the damage
documentation should be made as ef ﬁcient and precise as possible.
The damage documentation tool consists of a form, which is
represented by a graphical user interface in the software environ-
ment ( Fig. 4 ) and guides the user through the data input.
The process characteristics are usually described in detail in the
(separate) event documentation database. Here, the process char-
acteristics are expressed in terms of mean deposition heights
around the building. If the deposit height varies around the
building, a further input form supports the user to document the
process characteristics on all sides of the building.
The input values are stored in the database and are, therefore,
available for subsequent computation steps, such as the imple-
mented mathematical function which calculates the monetary
value of the total construction costs of the buildings based on the
ofﬁcial price index of the Autonomous Province of Bozen-South
Tyrol ( Autonomous Province of Bozen-South Tirol, 2012a ). In
2012, the of ﬁcial prices of construction costs were V342 per cubic
metre of building volume, which is, respectively, V1369 per square
metre net living area. After the input of the ground plan area and
the number of ﬂoors, the value of the building is calculated and
inserted in the database.
Another mathematical function calculates the monetary value of
the restoration costs by using the average hourly salaries and the
general cost calculation guidelines for constructions of the
Autonomous Province of Bozen-South Tyrol (2012b) . This of ﬁcial
database stores the necessary material costs and associated
Fig. 3. The structure of the integrated toolbox.M. Papathoma-K €ohle et al. / Environmental Modelling & Software 63 (2015) 156 e169 161
Fig. 4. The screen shot of the graphical user interface of the tool for damage documentation.M. Papathoma-K €ohle et al. / Environmental Modelling & Software 63 (2015) 156 e169 162
personnel working hours in standardised units. The data is acces-
sible via an XML interface for use in any software, or in terms of a
MS Access ©database. The vulnerability tool uses the MS Access ©
tables of the price-index database for further computation. The
ofﬁcial data sets were imported into the tool database representing
the construction costs of this speci ﬁc region. The mathematical
function implemented in the tool considers the dimension of the
building and the other input data (e.g. number of broken windows
and doors, area of walls to be repainted, etc. see Table 1 ) to compute
the necessary costs for each individual working step during the
potential re-instatement of the building. Finally, the costs of each
individual working step and the necessary material costs are
summed up. After the input of the documented damages, the
calculated costs are shown in the documentation form ( Fig. 5 ). If the
documented damage is connected with a GIS-dataset of the
buildings, the results of the documentation tool can be shown in a
map ( Fig. 6 ).
The record set of the damage documentation for each building is
subsequently complemented by two computed values: (a) the
construction costs of the building and (b) the costs for repairing the
damage due to the respective hazard event. These two values arethen used by the tool for the assessment of loss of future events and
for the update of the vulnerability function.
4.2. Loss assessment of future events
The tool for loss assessment of future events requires the input
of information, such as the building category and functionality, the
ﬂoor plan, the number of ﬂoors and the existence of a basement,
the use of the ground ﬂood and the upper ﬂoors, and additional
information on auxiliary buildings such as garages, sheds and
storerooms. Using this data, the tool calculates the total value of the
construction costs using the of ﬁcial price index ( Autonomous
Province of Bozen-South Tirol, 2012a ) as described above.
Furthermore, since the expected process intensity is expressed as
the height of debris deposits, this information is also needed. On
the basis of this value, the tool computes the degree of loss using
the vulnerability function ( Fig. 5 ).
If the presence of a basement is unknown, the tool calculates
two values. As a minimum value, the construction costs are calcu-lated without considering a basement. In the maximum value, the
construction costs of a basement the size of the ﬁrstﬂoor are
considered. Additionally, based on the minimum and maximum
construction costs, a mean value is also given. The tool calculates
the potential damage by multiplying the degree of loss with the
mean value of the construction costs.
This procedure was also incorporated as a GIS-procedure in the
ArcGIS software environment. On the basis of an overlay of the GIS-
dataset of the building characteristics (function, use of the building,
ground plan area, ﬂoors) and the hazard maps (scenarios with
process intensities), the potential losses caused by selectedscenarios can be computed over large areas. The GIS-procedure
uses the vulnerability function computed from the tool database.
4.3. Update of the vulnerability curve
The vulnerability curve derives from the degree of loss associ-
ated with an expected process intensity. After recording the new
damage documentation data (including information regarding the
value of the buildings, the intensity of the process and the loss
height), the update module of the tool re-calculates the parameters
of the stored vulnerability function. The degree of loss is expressed
as the ratio between repairing costs (monetary damage) and con-
struction costs (object value) in terms of a Weibull function
(Formula 1 (Totschnig et al., 2011; Papathoma-K €ohle et al., 2012a ,
b)).
y¼1/C0ea/C18
xþb
b/C01/C19c
(1)
Where:
y: degree of loss
a,b,c: factors describing the shape of the Weibull-function
x: process intensity
The factors describing the shape of the vulnerability curve (a,b,c)
are recalculated based on the newly recorded datasets. The func-
tion itself does not change. It is assumed that with a growing
dataset and detailed and improved documentation of damage of
individual buildings, the vulnerability curve will become more and
more reliable.
5. Implementation and practical use
The toolbox was used into three different applications. The three
tools (damage documentation, loss assessment of future scenarios,
and updating of the vulnerability curve) have been implemented
into a Microsoft SQL Server and ESRI ArcGIS. The system offers the
graphical user interface for data entry and output (as shown in
Figs. 4 and 5 ); it contains the knowledge base for calculating the
total amount and costs of restoration works (extract from the
ofﬁcial price list of construction costs), and the database for the
insertion of damage documentation. The routines and functions for
the cost calculation and the calculation of the vulnerability curve
are also implemented in the database as server functions. The
database forms are accessible via internet.
5.1. Damage documentation
During the damage documentation in the ﬁeld, shortly after a
hazard event, a mobile internet connection is not always possible.Table 1
Modi ﬁed functional approaches for regression analysis of vulnerability. As Frechet distributions with different numbers of parameters were tested, a nu meral suf ﬁx was used to
distinguish between them. The RMSE for the Exponential, Weibull and Frechet functions is provided in the last column.
Distribution Mathematical notation Number of unknown parameters Interval of the explaining variable Root mean square error
Modi ﬁed Weibull
1/C0e/C0a/C18
xþb
b/C01/C19c3
a, b, c[0;þ∞) 0.1318
Modi ﬁed Exponential
1/C0e/C0a/C18
xþb
b/C01/C192
a, b[0;þ∞) 0.1437
Modi ﬁed Frechet no. 1
e/C0/C18
xþb
b/C01/C19/C0a2
a, b[0;þ∞) 0.1355
Modi ﬁed Frechet no. 2
e/C0c/C18
xþb
b/C01/C19/C0a3
a, b, c[0;þ∞) 0.1355M. Papathoma-K €ohle et al. / Environmental Modelling & Software 63 (2015) 156 e169 163
Therefore, the tool was implemented into an MS Excel spreadsheet
by using VBA and the same windows forms of the database. The
spreadsheet contains the same graphical user interface as the
database and stores the data in the same data format for an easy
import into the database. The spreadsheet-based tool can be used
on a tablet computer without internet connection.
The damage documentation tool was tested during the damage
documentation in the consequences of numerous debris ﬂow
events in the area of Vipiteno/Sterzing, Autonomous Province of
Bozen eSouth Tyrol, Italy (August 4th and 5th, 2012; refer to Zischg
(2012) for details). A heavy rainfall event triggered more than ten
debris ﬂows. The debris ﬂows damaged 52 mostly residential or
residential/agricultural buildings. The physical characteristics of
the debris ﬂow events were documented by the of ﬁcial authorities
of the Autonomous Province of Bozen eSouth Tyrol. The damage
on the buildings and houses were documented during a ﬁeld
campaign ﬁve days after the event with the presented tool. Thedamaged buildings were surveyed and the damage was recorded
using the damage documentation form shown in Fig. 4 . The tool
was used on a tablet computer and supported an ef ﬁcient docu-
mentation and time-saving damage assessment; the 52 buildings
were documented and the related losses subsequently estimated
within one day. Besides the photographic documentation, the tool
did not require post- ﬁeld processing.
5.2. Loss estimation
The total sum of incurring losses caused by the event was esti-
mated by the tool to be 1.3 Mio. V. The process intensities
impacting the building envelopes were locally very high with
deposition heights of more than 2 m, with a mean of 0.7 m and a
median of 0.3 m. Two thirds of the buildings affected by the debris
ﬂow did not experience structural damage. Two buildings were
totally destroyed. Eleven buildings experienced damage in the
Fig. 5. Graphical user interface of the loss assessment tool.M. Papathoma-K €ohle et al. / Environmental Modelling & Software 63 (2015) 156 e169 164
interior because the debris entered into the building through
broken windows or doors. The spatial pattern of the deposition
height and ﬂooding as well as the damage distribution in the
speci ﬁc area are shown in Fig. 6 .
A comparison of the estimated loss (1.3 Mio. V) with the actual
cost of this event is not possible because the estimation of the local
authorities included also monetary losses regarding the content of
the buildings and agricultural equipment.
5.3. Updating of the vulnerability curve
After recording the damage into the database, and after calcu-
lating the losses with the ﬁrst two parts of the tool, the parameters
of the vulnerability function were recalculated with the third part.
The entire dataset consists of 271 documented damages: 136 from
Austria ( Totschnig and Fuchs, 2013 ), 34 from Martell valley (South
Tirol, Italy) ( Papathoma-K €ohle et al., 2012a ), and 100 damage from
the Vipiteno/Sterzing and P ﬁtsch/Val die Vizze areas as described
above.
The dataset is divided into a training dataset (80% of the original
data) and a test dataset (20% of the original data). The test dataset
was strati ﬁed as such that both datasets contained the same
amount of high and low values ( Fig. 7 ).
The training dataset, composed from a total of 217 cases, was
further divided randomly into ten subsets of equal size (22 caseseach) in order to cross-validate the different data models tenfold.
Subsequently, we tested different possible loss functions for their
power to ﬁt best the training dataset. These functions had to
comply with the mathematical requirements of (a) de ﬁning
vulnerability as the dependent variable in a closed interval [0; 1];
(b) a steady and monotonic increase within the interval of its
explaining variable (intensity); (c) steadiness with respect to higher
orders within the de ﬁned interval; and (d) de ﬁnition of its
explaining variable either in the unbounded interval ( /C0∞;þ∞)o r
in the half-open interval, bounded from below [0; þ∞). Following
Totschnig et al. (2011) , an Exponential function, as well as a Weibull
and two Frechet distributions were tested. These different func-
tions were trained on the ten sub-samples of 22 data points
(tenfold cross-validation), and as a result a Root Mean Square Error
(RMSE) was obtained for each one of them (see Table 1 ).
As the modi ﬁed Weibull distribution obtained the smallest
RMSE (0.1318), this function was chosen to best represent the
training dataset. In a second set of calculation, the Weibull function
was tested taking the 20% residual test dataset. The RMSE increased
slightly to 0.1358, which means that this function is able to project
future (unknown) events with an accuracy of almost 87%.
InFig. 8 , the alteration of the Weibull distribution is presented in
dependence on the amount of data considered. It is shown that, for
the Martell event, the losses were slightly lower for small and
medium process intensities up to 1.5 m deposition height, and
Fig. 6. Map of showing the spatial pattern of the process intensity distribution (left) and the monetary damage distribution (Fussendrass, community of Val le di Vizze/P ﬁtsch)).
Fig. 7. The training and the test dataset used for the recalculation of the parameters of the vulnerability function.M. Papathoma-K €ohle et al. / Environmental Modelling & Software 63 (2015) 156 e169 165
slightly above the population for higher process intensities. The
combination of different sample data (Austria, Martell case study
and the damage from Vipiteno/Sterzing and P ﬁtsch/Val die Vizze)
shows how the shape of the function is altered due to different
values of the parameters a, b and c calculated according to Equation
(1).I nTable 2 , the values of the parameters describing the Weibull
function (a, b, c) for the different case studies and respective curves
are shown.
In general, the results also show that the spread is considerable
for medium process intensities. Therefore, if the vulnerability func-
tion is used to calculate damage on single objects, the results may
over- or underestimate the real losses. The method implies consid-
eration of a minimum number of some objects in loss assessments.
However, it is dif ﬁcult to set a minimum number of data, as more
factors may in ﬂuence the reliability of the curve. For example, the
data points should represent cases of the full spectrum of values. In
other words, buildings that have suffered very high degree of loss
should be used as well as others that have suffered minimum loss.
6. Discussion
The toolbox presented herein offers a number of solutions to
various challenges that decision makers and planners have to deal
with, such as: a) future change (climate and socio-economic) and
associated increasing of damage costs, b) reliable vulnerabilityassessment that will contribute to improved risk analysis, and c)
better documentation of events and associated damage in large
scale, etc. In the following paragraphs, the most important bene ﬁts
and limitations of the present study are described. Finally, ideas for
further development of the presented tool in the future are also
outlined.
6.1. Bene ﬁts
The greatest bene ﬁt of the toolbox is its multi-functionality. The
toolbox presented here can be used for loss estimation, rapid
damage assessment and documentation at local level, and
improvement through continuous updating of the existing core
vulnerability curve. The tool has the ability to self-improve and to
work against one of the greatest drawbacks in the ﬁeld of risk
analysis, which is the lack of reliable and adequate data. The tool
improves the data collection procedure by providing a user-friendly
and standardised data collection method that does not require a
high number of quali ﬁed personnel. The data collection can take
place on site within a short time period after the event. Depending
on the availability of an internet connection, the data can be stored
directly in the database or in a spreadsheet.
The toolbox can also be used as a basis for cost bene ﬁt analysis.
Once the overall monetary loss of a hypothetical event is assessed,the alternative monetary loss by using mitigation measures may
also be calculated. In this way, the best alternative risk mitigation
and management strategies can be chosen. The implementation of
the functions in a GIS-procedure is unproblematic when a dataset
of buildings including their functionality and extent is available.
Through the integrated functions, the reconstruction values of each
building can be calculated on the basis of the attributes of the input
dataset. The function delineates the vulnerability value from the
intersection between the buildings dataset and the hazard intensity
map and, therefore, calculates the expected loss for every object
exposed to the hazard. Using GIS, not only the assessment of
Fig. 8. Results of the recalculation of the vulnerability curve after the increase in the sample dataset. The green curve shows the vulnerability function ca lculated on the basis of all
the data. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Table 2
The parameters a, b, c for the Weibull function for the different case studies/curvesshown in Fig. 8 .
Austria
(orange curve)Austria and
Italy/Martell(blue curve)Italy/Martell
(black curve)All data
(green curve)
a /C01.253 /C01.138 /C00.27 /C01.671
b 2.438 2.177 1.287 3.189C 1.892 2.202 2.974 1.746M. Papathoma-K €ohle et al. / Environmental Modelling & Software 63 (2015) 156 e169 166
potential losses on buildings over large areas is possible, but also,
the databases can be easily updated and the results can be visual-
ised. The vulnerability of the elements at risk is not calculated in a
static way, but, through the connection to GIS, the spatial pattern of
the vulnerability may be also visualised and, in this way, the rela-
tionship between the natural process and its consequences may be
better investigated. Moreover, databases including loss data may be
exported and used in other applications.
An important bene ﬁt of the toolbox is that it can be used by
multiple users that are not necessarily experts or experienced spe-
cialists. Decision makers and stakeholders with different back-
grounds, such as, scientists, technicians, and administrative
personnel, may all make use of the advantages of the toolbox. The
situation and damage pattern following a disastrous event may
change very quickly due to the need of the authorities and the local
population to bring the situation back to normal. The tool offers a
quick way of documenting damage directly on site, so that the
original situation of the damaged elements following an event can be
directly recorded. An innovative element of the toolbox is that, apart
from the recorded damage, it also records (and creates a database of)
building characteristics that in ﬂuence its overall vulnerability
(vulnerability indicators). In this way, two of the most commonly
used methods for vulnerability assessment (vulnerability curves and
vulnerability indicators) are integrated in the same tool supporting
rather than opposing each other. Furthermore, the scale that the
toolbox is used at offers a great detail of the damage pattern. Until
now damage databases are maintained mostly at community level
and they miss great detail (e.g. damage and intensity per building).
The toolbox also offers possibilities of improvement and expansion
such as additional elements at risks (infrastructure, agricultural
areas, and open spaces) and hazard types. However, the most
important bene ﬁt that the toolbox can demonstrate through the
present study is its capacity to actively support risk reduction stra-
tegies and climate change adaptation efforts.
Finally, an additional strength of the tool is that, although the
core vulnerability curve itself cannot be transferred and used in
another area with different characteristics and type of built envi-
ronment, the tool itself may be immediately used by local data and
start performing by tuning itself automatically to the local context.
6.2. Limitations and improvement
One of the most signi ﬁcant limitations of the tool is the dif ﬁculty
of recording information regarding the intensity of the process on
each building. The intensity of the ﬂuvial bedload transport or debris
ﬂow has been expressed in this paper as the height of debris de-
posits. However, in many cases this height was assumed by looking
at the size of destruction or at the stains that material and water
have left on the walls of the building. Moreover, the intensity of the
process depends, apart from the deposition height, also on other
factors, such as the velocity, the viscosity and the direction of the
ﬂow that approaches the building. These factors are generally
challenging to record for each affected building. However, in some
recent studies ( Quan Luna et al., 2011; Jakob et al., 2012 ), informa-
tion regarding the velocity and the viscosity of debris ﬂows has been
acquired through modelling of past events. In the case of the pre-
sented tool, intensity of the process is recorded through improved
documentation, establishing the link between event and damage
documentation. Nevertheless, during the development of the tool
many assumptions had to be made which increased the level of
uncertainty. There are uncertainties associated with the input data
(e.g object value, intensity assessment), and uncertainties associ-
ated with the model procedure (e.g. monetary loss assessment) that
were not considered or quanti ﬁed in this study. In more detail,
sources of uncertainties are related to: a) the estimation of theprocess intensity, b) the estimation of the degree of loss, c) the value
of buildings and d) the credibility of the existing data. However, the
quanti ﬁcation of these uncertainties within the tool and recom-
mendations regarding their reduction could be one of the potential
future improvements. The quanti ﬁcation of uncertainties is very
important for the end-users of the tool that, in this way, may get an
indication of how well the tool is expected to perform. The un-
certainties related to the development of the vulnerability curve
which formed the basis of the tool presented in this paper have been
quanti ﬁed in a recent study ( Eidsvig et al., 2014 ). However, their
quanti ﬁcation is not yet included as a function of the tool.
Furthermore, the tool may be transferable to areas with houses
of similar type of construction and similar construction costs.
However, if the building types are different, a new vulnerability
curve has to be developed. The database of the construction costs
can be easily adapted to other regions, if mean values for the single
restoration works are available there in a standardized format. The
development of the curve is often prevented by data limitations.
However, the tool itself with its rapid damage assessment function
is expected to improve data availability.
Moreover, since the database at the moment contains only a
limited number of documented cases, the function is calculated
based on all building types available. Nevertheless, in the future, a
growing set of documented data will allow the development of
more than one vulnerability functions for the different types of
buildings (use, type of construction etc.).
6.3. Outlook
A future development of the tool, apart from its applications in
other areas, must include more elements at risk. A similar toolbox
could include critical infrastructure, such as powerlines, railway
and road networks, industrial or other important buildings, such as
airports and railway stations. Moreover, the tool could also be used
for the loss estimation of agricultural areas, based on the intensity
of the process and monetary loss, which includes for example the
cleaning costs, replanting and the harvest loss. The tool could be
also adequately modi ﬁed to be used for other hazard types, such as
ﬂoods. Although this paper is focussing mainly on direct losses to
the built environment, the focus of the risk reduction strategies is
always the protection of the human life. In this respect, the toolbox
could be expanded to include data regarding the population e.g.
number of inhabitants, population density, characteristics of the
population, such as health condition, income, mobility, and density
during different times of the year and the day. Information on
people could also be included in the documentation process (e.g.
number of casualties per building etc.). Nonetheless, one of the
most important developments of the existing toolbox could be the
possibility of quantifying its uncertainties in order to enable deci-
sion making. As it was mentioned in the previous paragraph, work
concerning the quanti ﬁcation of uncertainties has already been
done and the next step is the integration of the quanti ﬁcation of
uncertainties in the tool. Finally, the tool could be used remotely
from unquali ﬁed users as a phone or tablet application in order to
populate a central database with data by ordinary people (non-
experts) that are located on the spot during or right after an eventand may assist in the post-damage data collection and documen-
tation. This would be a step towards solving one of the biggest
problems in the loss estimation and vulnerability assessment ﬁeld,
which is the one of data availability.
7. Conclusion
A toolbox for loss documentation for landslide hazards is pre-
sented. The toolbox can be used by decision makers to assessM. Papathoma-K €ohle et al. / Environmental Modelling & Software 63 (2015) 156 e169 167
potential losses of future debris ﬂow events but also to document
and record damage of real events in a rapid, suf ﬁcient and detailed
way. The toolbox is a valuable instrument in the hands of stake-
holders considering the on-going changes in the frequency and
magnitude of hazardous events and also in the spatial pattern of
the elements at risk. The tool offers also a solution to one of the
most common challenges in risk assessment, which is the lack of
adequate data. The databases included in the toolbox may be
exported and used for other applications, but also the new data may
be used to continuously update the tool and increase its reliability.
Although the toolbox is an important step towards loss estimation
at local level for debris ﬂow hazards, there is still a need for
continuous research in the ﬁeld, in order to better understand the
interactions between natural processes and the built environment,
so that we are able to reduce the vulnerability of elements at risk
and eventually the costs related to natural disasters.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Bruno Mazzorana from the
Department of Hydraulic Engineering of the Autonomous Province
of Bozen eSouth Tyrol, Italy. He supported the documentation of
the damaged buildings following the debris ﬂow events in August
2012 in the Vipiteno/Sterzing area and provided information on the
process intensities. Furthermore, the authors would like to thank
the reviewers and the editors for their valuable comments and
suggestions to an earlier version of this paper. Funding for the
presented research was provided by the Austrian Science Fund
(FWF, L535-N10) and the EU project MOVE (Methods for the
Improvement of Vulnerability Assessment in Europe; http://www.
move-fp7.eu , contract number 211590).
References
Akbas, S.O., Blahut, J., Sterlacchini, S., 2009. Critical assessment of existing physical
vulnerability estimation approaches for debris ﬂows. In: Malet, J.P., Remaître, A.,
Bogaard, T. (Eds.), Proceedings of Landslide Processes: from GeomorphologicMapping to Dynamic Modeling, Strasbourg, 6 e7 Feb 2009, pp. 229 e233.
APAT eAgenzia per la Protezione dell ‘Ambiente e per i Servizi Tecnici, 2007.
Rapporto sulle frane in Italia. Il progetto IFFI- Metodologia, risultati e rapport
regionali. Rapporti 78/2007. Roma. ISBN 978-88-448-0310-0 .
Apel, H., Aronica, G., Kreibich, H., Thieken, A., 2009. Flood risk analyses ehow
detailed do we need to be? Nat. Hazards 49 (1), 79 e98.
Autonome Provinz Bozen Südtirol, 2012a. Beschluss der Landesregierung vom 18.
Juni 2012, Nr. 904. Amtsblatt Nr. 26/I-II vom 27/06/2012. http://www.regione.
taa.it/bur/pdf/I-II/2012/26/BO/BO26120179833.pdf . access on July 2013.
Autonome Provinz Bozen Südtirol, 2012b. Resort Bauen. Abteilung 11: Hochbau und
technischer Dienst. Richtpreisverzeichnis Hochbauarbeiten 2012. Online data-
base version. http://www.provinz.bz.it/Hochbau/downloads/hoed_2012.pdf .
http://www.provinz.bz.it/Hochbau/browse_d.aspx . access on July 2013.
Balica, S.F., Popescu, I., Beevers, L., Wright, N.G., 2013. Parametric and physically
based modelling techniqures for ﬂood risk and vulnerability assessment: a
comparison. Environ. Model. Softw. 41, 84 e92.
Barredo, J.I., 2009. Normalised ﬂood losses in Europe: 1970 e2006. Nat. Hazards
Earth Syst. Sci. 9, 97 e104.
Bendimerad, F., 2001. Loss estimation: a powerful tool for risk assessment and
mitigation. Soil Dyn. Earthq. Eng. 21, 467 e472.
Berger, E., Grisotto, S., Hübl, J., Kienholz, H., Kollarits, S., Leber, D., Loipersberger, A.,
Marchi, L., Mazzorana, B., Moser, M., N €ossig, T., Riedler, W., Scheidl, C.,
Schmid, F., Schnetzer, I., Siegel, H., Volk, G., 2007. DIS-alp: Disaster Information
System of Alpine Regions Final report, p. 96 .
Birkmann, J., Cardona, O.M., Carre ~no, M.L., Barbat, A.H., Pelling, M.,
Schneiderbauer, S., Kienberger, S., Keiler, M., Alexander, D., Zeil, P., Welle, T.,
2013. Framing vulnerability, risk and societal responses: the MOVE framework.
Nat. Hazards 67 (2), 193 e211.
Bründl, M., Romang, H.E., Bischof, N., Rheinberger, C.M., 2009. The risk concept and
its application in natural hazard risk management in Switzerland. Nat. Hazards
Earth Syst. Sci. 9, 801 e813.
Bründl, M., 2012. Econo-Me-Develop ea software tool for assessing natural hazard
risk and economic optimisation of mitigation measures. In: Proceedings, 2012
International Snow Science Workshop, Anchorage, Alaska, pp. 639 e643.
Burren, S., Eyer, W., 2000. STORME- ein Informationsgestützter Ereignis-Kataster
der Schweiz. Internationales Symposion Intrpr €avent 2000. Band 1, 25 e37
(Villach: Kreiner Druck) .Ciurean, R.L., Schr €oter, D., Glade, T., 2013. Conceptual frameworks of vulnerability
assessments for natural disasters reduction. In: Tiefenbacher, J. (Ed.), Ap-
proaches to Disaster Management eExamining the Implications of Hazards,
Emergencies and Disasters. InTech, pp. 3 e32.
EEA, 2012. Climate Change, Impacts and Vulnerability in Europe 2012. Of ﬁce for
Ofﬁcial Publications of the European Union, Luxembourg, p. 300 .
Eidsvig, U.M.K., Papathoma-K €ohle, M., Du, J., Glade, T., Vangelsten, B.V., 2014.
Quanti ﬁcation of model uncertainty in debris ﬂow vulnerability assessment.
Eng. Geol. 181, 15 e26.
Fuchs, S., 2009. Susceptibility versus resilience to mountain hazards in Austria e
paradigms of vulnerability revisited. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 9 (2),
337e352.
Fuchs, S., 2013. Cost-bene ﬁt analysis of natural hazard mitigation. In: Bobrowski, P.
(Ed.), Encyclopedia of Natural Hazards. Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 121 e125.
Fuchs, S., Bründl, M., 2005. Damage potential and losses resulting from snow ava-
lanches in settlements of the canton of Grisons, Switzerland. Nat. Hazards 34
(1), 53 e69.
Fuchs, S., Keiler, M., Zischg, A., Bründl, M., 2005. The long-term development of
avalanche risk in settlements considering the temporal variability of damage
potential. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 5 (6), 893 e901.
Fuchs, S., Heiss, K., Hübl, J., 2007a. Towards an empirical vulnerability function for
use in debris ﬂow risk assessment. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 7 (5), 495 e506.
Fuchs, S., Th €oni, M., McAlpin, M.C., Gruber, U., Bründl, M., 2007b. Avalanche hazard
mitigation strategies assessed by cost effectiveness analyses and cost bene ﬁt
analyses eevidence from Davos. Switz. Nat. Hazards 41 (1), 113 e129.
Fuchs, S., Kuhlicke, C., Meyer, V., 2011. Editorial for the special issue: vulnerability to
natural hazards ethe challenge of integration. Nat. Hazards 58 (2), 609 e619.
Fuchs, S., Birkmann, J., Glade, T., 2012a. Vulnerability assessment in natural hazard
and risk analysis: current approaches and future challenges. Nat. Hazards 64
(3), 1969 e1975 .
Fuchs, S., Ornetsmüller, C., Totschnig, R., 2012b. Spatial scan statistics in vulnera-
bility assessment ean application to mountain hazards. Nat. Hazards 64 (3),
2129e2151 .
Fuchs, S., Tsao, T.-C., Keiler, M., 2012c. Quantitative vulnerability functions for use in
mountain hazard risk management ethe challenge of transfer. In:
Koboltschng, G., Hübl, J., Braun, J. (Eds.), Internationales Symposion Inter-
praevent, Genoble, April 23 e26, 2012. Internationale Forschungsgesellschaft
Interpraevent, Klagenfurt, pp. 885 e896.
Fuchs, S., Keiler, M., Sokratov, S.A., Shnyparkov, A., 2013. Spatiotemporal dynamics:
the need for an innovative approach in mountain hazard risk management. Nat.
Hazards 68 (3), 1217 e1241 .
Füssel, H.-M., 2007. Vulnerability: a generally applicable conceptual framework for
climate change research. Glob. Environ. Change 17 (2), 155 e167.
Giupponi, C., Giove, S., Giannini, V., 2013. A dynamic assessment tool for exploring
and communicating vulnerability to ﬂoods and climate change. Environ. Model.
Softw. 44, 136 e147.
Glade, T., 2003. Vulnerability assessment in landslide risk analysis. Die Erde 134,
121e138.
Greiving, S., Fleischhauer, M., Lückenk €otter, J., 2006. A methodology for an inte-
grated risk assessment of spatially relevant hazards. J. Environ. Plan. Manag. 49
(1), 1e19.
Hilker, N., Badoux, A., Hegg, C., 2009. The Swiss ﬂood and landslide damage data-
base 1972 e2007. Nat. hazards earth Syst. Sci. 9, 913 e925.
Holub, M., Fuchs, S., 2009. Mitigating mountain hazards in Austria elegislation, risk
transfer, and awareness building. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 9 (2), 523 e537.
Holub, M., Suda, J., Fuchs, S., 2012. Mountain hazards: reducing vulnerability by
adapted building design. Environ. Earth Sci. 66 (7), 1853 e1870 .
Hübl, J., Kienholz, H., Loipersberger, A., 2002. DOMODIS-documentation of Moun-
tain Disasters, p. 40 .
Hufschmidt, G., Glade, T., 2010. Vulnerability analysis in geomorphic risk assess-
ment. In: Alc /C19antara-Ayala, I., Goudie, A.S. (Eds.), Geomorphological Hazards and
Disaster Prevention. Cambridge University Press, pp. 233 e243.
Hungr, O., Evans, S., Bovis, M., Hutchinson, J., 2001. A review of the classi ﬁcation of
landslides of the ﬂow type. Environ. Eng. Geoscience 7 (3), 221 e238.
IPCC, 2012. Managing the risks of extreme events and disasters to advance climate
change adaptation. A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the Inter-governmental Panel on Climate Change. In: Field, C.B., Barros, V., Stocker, T.F.,
Qin, D., Dokken, D.J., Ebi, K.L., Mastrandrea, M.D., Mach, K.J., Plattner, G.-K.,
Allen, S.K., Tignor, M., Midgley, P.M. (Eds.). Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, UK, and New York, NY, USA, 582 pp.
Jakob, M., Stein, D., Ulmi, M., 2012. Vulnerability of buildings to debris ﬂow impact.
Nat. Hazards 60 (2), 241 e261.
Kappes, M., Keiler, M., von Elverfeldt, K., Glade, T., 2012a. Challenges of analyzing
multi-hazard risk: a review. Nat. Hazards 64 (2), 1925 e1958 .
Kappes, M., Papathoma-K €ohle, M., Keiler, M., 2012b. Assessing physical vulnera-
bility for multi-hazards using an indicator-based methodology. Appl. Geogr. 32(2), 577 e590.
Kaswalder, C., 2009. Sch
€atzungsstudie zur Berechnung des Schadenspotentials bei
hochwasserereignissen durch die Rienz im Abschnitt Bruneck-St (Lorenzen.
Autonome Provinz Bozen, Südtirol) .
Keiler, M., 2011. Geomorphology and complexity einseparable connected? Z. für
Geomorphol. 55 (Suppl. 3), 233 e257.
Keiler, M., Zischg, A., Fuchs, S., Hama, M., St €otter, J., 2005. Avalanche related damage
potential echanges of persons and mobile values since the mid-twentieth
century, case study Galtür. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 5 (1), 49 e58.M. Papathoma-K €ohle et al. / Environmental Modelling & Software 63 (2015) 156 e169 168
Keiler, M., Sailer, R., J €org, P., Weber, C., Fuchs, S., Zischg, A., Sauermoser, S., 2006.
Avalanche risk assessment ea multi-temporal approach, results from Galtür,
Austria. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 6 (4), 637 e651.
Keiler, M., Knight, J., Harrison, S., 2010. Climate change and geomorphological
hazards in the eastern European Alps. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London Series A: Mathematical. Phys. Eng. Sci. 368, 2461 e2479 .
Keiler, M., Kellerer-Pirklbauer, A., Otto, J.-C., 2012. Concepts and implications of
environmental change and human impact: studies from Austrian geomorpho-
logical research. Geogra ﬁska Annaler Series A. Phys. Geogr. 94 (1), 1 e5.
Keiler, M., 2013. World-wide trends in natural disasters. In: Bobrowsky, P. (Ed.),
Encyclopaedia of Natural Hazards. Springer, pp. 1111e1114 .
Kienholz, H., Krummenacher, B., Kipfer, A., Perret, S., 2004. Aspects of integral risk
management in practice econsiderations with respect to mountain hazards in
Switzerland.€Osterreichische Wasser- Abfallwirtsch. 56 (3 e4), 43e50.
Lo, W.-C., Tsao, T.-C., Hsu, C.-H., 2012. Building vulnerability to debris ﬂows in
Taiwan: a preliminary study. Nat. Hazards 64 (3), 2107 e2128 .
Markantonis, V., Meyer, V., Schwarze, R., 2012. Valuating the intangible effects of
natural hazards. Review and analysis of the costing methods. Nat. Hazards EarthSyst. Sci. 12 (5), 1633 e1640 .
Marulanda, M.C., Carreno, M.L., Cardona, O.D., Ordaz, M.G., Barbat, A.H., 2013.
Probabilistic Earthquake Risk Assessment Using CAPRA: Application to the City
of Barcelona, Spain. Natural hazards, Online ﬁrst.http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s11069-013-0685-z .
Mazzorana, B., Fuchs, S., 2010. Fuzzy Formative Scenario Analysis for woody ma-
terial transport related risks in mountain torrents. Environ. Model. Softw. 25
(10), 1208 e1224 .
Meyer, V., Becker, N., Markantonis, V., Schwarze, R., van den Bergh, J.C.J.M.,
Bouwer, L.M., Bubeck, P., Ciavola, P., Genovese, E., Green, C., Hallegatte, S.,
Kreibich, H., Lequeux, Q., Logar, I., Papyrakis, E., Pfurtscheller, C., Poussin, J.,
Przyluski, V., Thieken, A., Viavattene, C., 2013. Review article: assessing the costsof natural hazards estate of the art and knowledge gaps. Nat. Hazards Earth
Syst. Sci. 13 (5), 1351 e1373 .
Papathoma-K €ohle, M., Kappes, M., Keiler, M., Glade, T., 2011. Physical vulnerability
assessment for alpine hazards: state of the art and future needs. Nat. Hazards
58 (2), 645 e680.
Papathoma-K €ohle, M., Keiler, M., Totschnig, R., Glade, T., 2012a. Improvement of
vulnerability curves using data from extreme events: debris ﬂow event in South
Tyrol. Nat. Hazards 64 (3), 2083 e2105 .
Papathoma-K €ohle, M., Totschnig, R., Keiler, M., Glade, T., 2012b. A new vulnerability
function for debris ﬂ
owethe importance of physical vulnerability assessment
in alpine areas. In: Koboltschng, G., Hübl, J., Braun, J. (Eds.), Internationales
Symposion Interpraevent, Genoble, April 23 e26, 2012. Klagenfurt, Inter-
nationale Forschungsgesellschaft Interpraevent, pp. 1033 e1043 .
Pﬁtscher, A., 1996. Wasserkatastrophen im Martelltal eDer 24./25. August 1987.
Municipality 23 Martell .Pogson, M., Hastings, A., Smith, P., 2012. Sensitivity of crop model predictions to
entire meteorological and soil input datasets highlights vulnerability to
drought. Environ. Model. Softw. 29, 37 e43.
Quan Luna, B., Blahut, J., Van Westen, C.J., Sterlacchini, S., Van Asch, T.W.J., AkbasS,
2011. The application of numerical debris ﬂow modelling for the generation of
physical 26 vulnerability curves. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 11, 2047 e2060 .
Samarasinghe, S., Strickert, G., 2013. Mixed-method integration and advances in
fuzzy cognitive maps for computational policy simulations for natural hazard
mitigation. Environ. Model. Softw. 39, 188 e200.
Scawthorn, C., Blais, N., Seligson, H., Tate, E., Mif ﬂin, E., Thomas, W., Murphy, J.,
Jones, C., 2006. HAZUS-MH ﬂood loss estimation methodology. I: overview and
ﬂood hazard characterization. Nat. Hazards Rev. 7, 60 e71.
Schmidt, J., Matcham, I., Reese, S., King, A., Bell, R., Henderson, R., Smart, G.,
Cousins, J., Smith, W., Heron, D., 2011. Quantitative multi-risk analysis for nat-
ural hazards: a framework for multi rsk modelling. Nat. Hazards 58, 1169 e1192 .
Serra, L., Juan, P., Varga, D., Mateu, J., Saez, M., 2013. Spatial pattern modelling of
wildﬁres in Catalonia, Spain 2004-2008. Environ. Model. Softw. 40, 235 e244.
Smith, K., Ward, R., 1998. Floods: Physical Processes and Human Impacts. John
Wiley &Sons, Chichester .
Tena-Chollet, F., Tixier, J., Dusserre, G., Mangin, J.-F., 2013. Development of a spatial
risk assessment tool for the transportation of hydrocarbons: mateorology and
implementation in a geographical information system. Environ. Model. Softw.
46, 61 e74.
Totschnig, R., Sedlacek, W., Fuchs, S., 2011. A quantitative vulnerability function for
ﬂuvial sediment transport. Nat. Hazards 58 (2), 681 e703.
Totschnig, R., Fuchs, S., 2013. Mountain torrents: quantifying vulnerability and
assessing uncertainties. Eng. Geol. 155, 31 e44.
UNDRO, 1984. Disaster Prevention and Mitigation ea Compendium of Current
Knowledge. United Nations, New York .
Uzielli, M., Nadim, F., Lacasse, S., Kaynia, A., 2008. A conceptual framework for
quantitative estimation of physical vulnerability to landslides. Eng. Geol. 102
(3e4), 251 e256.
Zischg, A., Fuchs, S., Keiler, M., St €otter, J., 2005. Temporal variability of damage
potential on roads as a conceptual contribution towards a short-term avalanche
risk simulation. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 5 (2), 235 e242.
Zischg, A., Macconi, P., Pollinger, R., Sperling, M., Mazzorana, B., Marangoni, N.,
Berger, E., Staf ﬂer, H.P., 2007. Historische Überschwemmungs- und Murgan-
gereignisse in Südtirol. Erhebung und Dokumentation. Der Schlern 3, 3 e16.
Zischg, A., 2012. Systematische Erhebung der Gef €ahrdungs- und Schadensbilder für
die Objektkategorien Wohnh €auser, Wirtschaftsgeb €aude und Verkehrswege in
ausgew €ahlten Auswirkungssystemen des Großraumereignisses des 4. und 5. In:
August 2012 P ﬁtscherbach eOberer Eisack als planungsunterstützende Ele-
mente des integralenNaturgefahrrisikomanagements im IREK eProjektgebiet.
Projekt Interreg IVA Italien e€Osterreich IREK e Integrales Rau-
mentwicklungskonzept für ausgew €ahlte Lebensr €aume des Wipptals. Bozen .M. Papathoma-K €ohle et al. / Environmental Modelling & Software 63 (2015) 156 e169 169
