Review article
Application of arti ﬁcial intelligence in three aspects of landslide risk
assessment: A comprehensive review
Rongjie Hea, Wengang Zhangb, Jie Douc, Nan Jiangd, Huaixian Xiaod, Jiawen Zhoua,*
aState Key Laboratory of Hydraulics and Mountain River Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, China
bSchool of Civil Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400044, China
cBadong National Observation and Research Station of Geohazards, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, 430074, China
dCollege of Water Resources and Hydropower, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, China
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
LandslidesArtiﬁcial intelligence
Machine learningDetection and mappingLandslide susceptibility
Prediction and warningABSTRACT
Landslides are one of the geological disasters with wide distribution, high impact and serious damage around the
world. Landslide risk assessment can help us know the risk of landslides occurring, which is an effective way toprevent landslide disasters in advance. In recent decades, arti ﬁcial intelligence (AI) has developed rapidly and has
been used in a wide range of applications, especially for natural hazards. Based on the published literatures, this
paper presents a detailed review of AI applications in landslide risk assessment. Three key areas where theapplication of AI is prominent are identi ﬁed, including landslide detection, landslide susceptibility assessment,
and prediction of landslide displacement. Machine learning (ML) containing deep learning (DL) has emerged as
the primary technology which has been considered successfully due to its ability to quantify complex nonlinear
relationships of soil structures and landslide predisposing factors. Among the algorithms, convolutional neuralnetworks (CNNs) and recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are two models that are most widely used with satis-
factory results in landslide risk assessment. The generalization ability, sampling training strategies, and hyper-
parameters optimization of these models are crucial and should be carefully considered. The challenges andopportunities of AI applications are also fully discussed to provide suggestions for future research in landslide risk
assessment.
1. Introduction
Landslides (including the movement of rocks, soils or debris down a
slope) are one of the most prevalent geological hazards in the world,
posing signi ﬁcant threats and causing substantial losses to human soci-
ety. According to the Global Fatal Landslide Database (GFLD), Fig. 1
shows the spatial distribution of the fatal landslides which has caused
serious damage to human society ( Froude and Petley, 2018 ). Unlike
other engineering materials, soils and rocks are three-phased system with
strong spatial variability and are sensitive to the change of moisture
content and the environment conditions, and respond in a highly
non-linear manner. These characteristics of soil structures make it dif ﬁ-
cult for us to prevent landslides effectively in advance. Therefore,
research on landslide risk assessment is crucial for the advancement of
human society.
Landslide risk assessment is de ﬁned as an assessment of the likelihood
of landslides occurring and the potential hazards that could result. Thepotential hazards contain the injuries, the loss of life and damaged assets
which could occur to a system like community or society in a given
period ( Guo et al., 2020a,b ). This paper mainly discusses the monitoring,
evolution and probabilistic analyses of landslides occurring which don't
address the impact on towns, residents and socio-economics. Landslide
risk assessment is divided into two categories: soft risk assessment
approach and hard risk assessment approach ( Lei et al., 2023 ). The
former focuses on the risk of landslides in a region and the latter pays
more attention to the risk of individual landslide ( Chen and Chen, 2021 ;
Lei et al., 2023 ).
In recent decades, studies have mainly focused on establishing
knowledge-driven expert systems to assess the risk of landslides ( Althu-
waynee et al., 2012 ;Kayastha et al., 2013 ;Pourghasemi et al., 2012a,b ;
Tien Bui et al., 2012a ). The results rely heavily on the personal experi-
ence of senior engineers with strong subjectivity. Moreover, the strong
spatial variability of soils and rocks causes uncertainty and diversity of
landslides in different regions ( Li et al., 2016a ;Liu and Leung, 2018 ).
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: jwzhou@scu.edu.cn (J. Zhou).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Rock Mechanics Bulletin
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/rock-mechanics-bulletin
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rockmb.2024.100144
Received 7 March 2024; Received in revised form 3 June 2024; Accepted 20 June 2024
Available online 6 July 20242773-2304/ ©2024 Chinese Society for Rock Mechanics &Engineering. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Co. Ltd. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
Thus, expert systems are only applicable in their designated survey area,
which are highly dependent on manual labor and subjective experience
of engineers. Semi-automated and automated operations which can
represent the complex non-linear relationships of soil structures are in
high demand.
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is an advanced technology aiming to
automate intellectual tasks that are normally performed by humans. It
has an excellent ability to characterize the inherent nonlinear relation-
ships between big data especially the geotechnical data ( Baghbani et al.,
2022 ). There are many branches of AI, including machine learning,
natural language processing, cloud computing and others ( Fig. 2 ).
Currently, AI is widely used in many areas, such as facial recognition,autonomous driving and human-machine interaction ( Fig. 2 ). The main
aim of this paper is to investigate the applications of AI in landslide risk
assessment. Research shows that the primary focus of AI applications in
landslide risk assessment is machine learning (ML) containing deep
learning (DL) ( Dikshit et al., 2021 ). It is a data-driven method combining
statistics with optimization theory.
This paper fully investigates the related studies of applications of AI in
landslide risk assessment published in recent decades including reviews
and research papers until 2024. This paper begins with the brief over-view of the AI techniques mainly used in landslide risk assessment. The
next section describes how AI techniques have been used in landslide risk
assessment. It categorizes the topics into three parts including landslide
detection, landslide susceptibility assessment and prediction of landslide
displacement. Other applications like sampling strategies, hyper-
parameters optimization and the development of graphical user inter-
face (GUI) are also brie ﬂy introduced. In the next section, the challenges
and future opportunities of AI techniques applied in landslide risk
assessment are also provided. Finally, the overall conclusions are made to
summarize the whole paper. The explainable AI combining with physical
meaning and the generalization ability of the used models are crucial for
future development.
2. Brief overview of AI techniques in landslide risk assessment
This section provides a brief overview of different AI techniques used
in landslide risk assessment including ML, DL, hybrid models (HMs),
performance testing of models and GUI. The former four are the methods
and the GUI represents the useful tool mainly applied in landslide risk
assessment.
2.1. Machine learning
ML is a data-driven method combining statistics with optimization
theory. As shown in Fig. 3 , it can be used for prediction and classi ﬁcation
(Jordan and Mitchell, 2015 ). For supervised learning, the collected data
are labeled before training, but for unsupervised learning, the data are all
unlabeled ( Jordan and Mitchell, 2015 ).
Fig. 1. Distribution of the NASA global fatal landslide database (modi ﬁed from GFLD, https://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/4710 ).
Fig. 2. The technologies of arti ﬁcial intelligence and its main application ﬁelds.R. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
2
Widely used ML models include linear regression, logistic regression
(LR), support vector machine (SVM), K nearest neighbors (KNN), clus-
tering, decision tree (DT), random forest (RF), naive bayes (NB), etc. The
crucial step is to determine the optimal parameter values of the model.
For the collected data, a training set is used for ﬁtting the parameters, and
a testing set is used for validating the ef ﬁciency of the outputs. The loss
function is an important index to measure the performance of the model.2.2. Deep learning
DL is an advanced ML approach that requires a larger amount of data
(LeCun et al., 2015 ). DL framework is established with neural networks,
and there are almost always more than three neuron layers ( Fig. 4 a–d).
DL mainly has three steps ( Fig. 4 e). First, all the input data are subjected
to a linear regression operation to obtain a series of results. Second, the
Fig. 3. The main objective of machine learning: (a) prediction of future trends based on historical data and (b) classi ﬁcation of the data according to speci ﬁc laws.
Fig. 4. Different deep learning models: (a) deep feedforward network; (b) long short-term memory; (c) recurrent neural network; (d) convolutional neural n etwork
and (e) working principle of one single neuron.R. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
3
linear regression results are substituted into an activation function to
obtain the outputs. The aim is to map the linear regression results to the
speciﬁc interval of the activation function. Third, the outputs are used as
inputs in the next layer of neurons. The calculation process is repeated to
eliminate the invalid features, and then the ﬁnal outputs can be obtained.
Compared with ML, the framework of DL more closely resembles the
complexity of the operating mechanism of the human neurological
system.
Convolutional neural network (CNN) and recurrent neural network
(RNN) are the two main DL frameworks that are most commonly used.
CNN is mainly used in the ﬁelds of image recognition, object recognition
and computer vision ( Fig. 4 d). RNN, on the other hand, is mainly used in
ﬁelds such as natural language processing and time series analyses
(Fig. 4 c). In time series prediction, Long-short-term (LSTM) neural net-
work's forgetting gate and memory gate effectively overcome the
forgetting problem of RNN, which can memorize the historical infor-
mation effectively ( Fig. 4 b).
Recently, transformer model consisting of encoders and decoders has
been gradually widely used in geotechnical engineering. The architecture
of transformer is shown in Fig. 5 . The model based on the attention
mechanism provides an effective solution for long-sequence time series
prediction and natural language processing ( Vaswani et al., 2017 ).
2.3. Hybrid model
HM integrates two or more ML models ( Kadavi et al., 2018 ), fully
combining the advantages of different models. It's also called ensemblelearning including bagging, boosting and stacking, etc. For instance, the
RF model is the simplest hybrid model and is composed of several de-
cision trees which can solve the over- ﬁtting problem of a single decision
tree ( Fig. 6 ). Some strategies like majority voting and averaging are used
to obtain the optimal result ( Fig. 6 ).
2.4. Performance testing of the model
The evaluation indexes are used to evaluate the performance of the
ML models. In general, seventy percent or eighty percent of the dataset is
used to train the model, and thirty percent or twenty percent of the
dataset is used to validate the ef ﬁciency of the model. The commonly
used evaluation indexes include accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score,
intersection over union (IoU), root mean square error (RMSE), meanabsolute error (MAE), area under curve (AUC), etc. These indexes are
deﬁned in Eqs. (1) –(7) as shown below ( Baghbani et al., 2022 ):
Accuracy ¼TPþTN
TPþFPþTNþFN(1)
Precision ¼TP
TPþFP(2)
Recall ¼TP
TPþFN(3)
F1 score ¼2precision /C1recall
precision þrecall(4)
IoU¼Intersection Area
Union Area(5)
RMSE ¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
nXn
i¼1ðPi/C0OiÞ2r
(6)
MAE ¼Pn
i¼1jPi/C0Oij
n(7)
where TP is the true positive value, i.e. the data predicted to be true and
actually true; FN is the false negative value, i.e. the data predicted to be
false but actually true; FP is the false positive value, i.e. the data predicted
to be true but actually false; TN is true negative value, i.e. the data pre-
dicted to be false but actually false; Pirepresents the actual outputs; Qi
represents the prediction outputs. AUC is the area under the receiver
operating characteristics curve (ROC).
The higher the accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score, IoU and AUC, and
the lower the RMSE and MAE, the more effective the model is. IoU is an
index mainly used in image recognition like object detection and se-
mantic segmentation. Selecting reasonable evaluation indexes is crucial
before model training. It's necessary to understand how these indexes
behave overall, not individually.
2.5. Graphical user interface
GUIs are important tools that help normal users to implement com-
plex algorithmic functions through a simple interface to make the land-
slide risk assessment. Generally speaking, a GUI encapsulates the
complex mathematical models of ML and provides a visual platform for
normal users. It enables normal users to easily apply relevant ML models
Fig. 5. The main architecture of the Transformer model (modi ﬁed from Vas-
wani et al., 2017 ).
Fig. 6. The architecture of the simplest hybrid model named random forest.R. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
4
to solve practical problems even if they do not understand the mathe-
matical principles of the models. The development of a GUI is essential to
realize the widespread application and popularization of AI techniques.
3. How AI techniques have been applied in landslide risk
assessment
This section describes how AI techniques have been used in landslide
risk assessment. Three key areas are identi ﬁed and discussed including
landslide detection, landslide susceptibility assessment and prediction of
landslide displacement in this section. Other applications like sampling
strategies, hyper-parameter optimization and GUIs are also discussed.
Among these areas, landslide detection and landslide susceptibility
assessment both belong to the soft risk assessment approach (regional)
and prediction of landslide displacement belongs to the hard riskassessment approach (individual) ( Lei et al., 2023 ).
ML is an algorithm that can learn from data without relying on rules-
based programming. The statistical models used in the following sections
are the formalization of relationships between variables in the form of
mathematical equations which are distinguished from ML. Generally, ML
is a subset of AI and DL is a subset of ML ( Fig. 2 ). But in the following
sections of the paper, ML and DL are distinguished. ML speci ﬁcally refers
to the conventional algorithms like SVM, LR, linear regression, DT, RF,
AdaBoost, clustering, KNN, NB and others. DL refers to the neural
network constructed by different frameworks like arti ﬁcial neural
network (ANN), CNN, RNN, graph neural network (GNN), LSTM and
others.
Figure 7 shows the statistical results of the representative studies
published in recent decades using AI techniques in landslide risk
assessment for several main ﬁelds. Landslide susceptibility assessment
has the highest number of studies followed by landslide displacement
prediction, landslide detection and GUI. Landslide detection still relies
heavily on visual interpretation by remote sensing techniques without
the use of AI techniques. DL has been used as the main technique grad-
ually replacing ML methods and statistical models. It still lacks advanced
GUI tools that can be effectively used in this ﬁeld.
3.1. Landslide detection
To prevent disasters caused by landslides, it is essential to identify
slopes where landslides have previously occurred. Landslide detection
involves the recognition and mapping of landslides in a region, providing
information on the location, type, boundary, volume, and date of land-
slides. This is a critical prerequisite for determining landslide
susceptibility.
Traditionally, landslide detection methods rely on the visual inter-
pretation of remote sensing images and aerial photography, as supported
byﬁeld surveys ( Zhang et al., 2024 ). However, this approach is resourceintensive, time-consuming, and subject to interpretation bias ( Das et al.,
2023 ;Wang et al., 2020b ). Therefore, semi-automated or automated
method by AI is crucial in generating landslide maps, which can effec-
tively reduce the workload of manual landslide detection ( Das et al.,
2023 ;Liu et al., 2023a ;Liu et al., 2023b ,Liu et al., 2023c ,Liu et al.,
2024a ;Lv et al., 2023 ;Zhang et al., 2024 ). Moreover, traditional land-
slide detection based on visual interpretation relies heavily on people's
subjective judgment. This leads to inconsistent criteria for detecting
landslides. The criteria for detecting landslides based on AI models are
uniform and the results obtained are more objective than manual
detection.
The application of AI, particularly image recognition technology, has
emerged as a useful method in recognizing landslides using remote
sensing and aerial photography data. The general ﬂowchart of this
approach is depicted in Fig. 8 . This approach enables the accurate and
efﬁ
cient identi ﬁcation of landslides and reduces the dependence on
human interpretation, improving the reliability and reproducibility of
landslide detection.
3.1.1. ML in landslide detection
Initially, pixel-based ML models were utilized to detect landslides.
These models focus on detecting landslides and non-landslides at the
pixel level. Thus, complex features of geomorphological factors such as
rivers, trees, mountains, and trenches are not considered ( Fig. 9 ). In
2005, Nichol and Wong (2005) employed a pixel-based maximum like-
lihood classi ﬁer with satellite images, achieving approximately 70%
detection of existing landslides. Borghuis et al. (2007) utilized both su-
pervised and unsupervised pixel-based ML methods and successfully
detected landslides. Various pixel-based methods have varying perfor-
mance levels. For instance, pixel-based support vector machine models
have outperformed other models, such as RF and maximum likelihood
classi ﬁers ( Dikshit et al., 2021 ). Generally, pixel-based methods have
been applied successfully in landslide detection and continue to be
widely used as an effective semi-automated method at present ( Liu et al.,
2023a ;Liu et al., 2023d ;Liu et al., 2024b ;Lv et al., 2023 ;Zhang et al.,
2024 ).
In object-based ML approaches to landslide detection, the physical
meaning of each complex geological feature consisting of landslides is
considered ( Fig. 9 ).Figure 10 shows the recognition results of different
landslides and non-landslides at pixel-based and object-based level,
respectively. Comparing with the pixel-based method, the object-based
method may be more appropriate for identifying complex geological
features and natural phenomena ( H€olbling et al., 2012 ). For instance, not
like the exposed landslides, the landslides covered with vegetation are
usually dif ﬁcult to recognize. To address this situation, ( Li et al., 2015 )
proposed an object-based approach to detect forested landslides, reach-
ing an accuracy of 89.11%. At present, object-based methods are widely
Fig. 7. Distribution of the use of AI techniques in landslide risk assessment in
different application areas.
 Fig. 8. General ﬂowchart of landslide detection.R. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
5
used for semi-automated landslide detection ( Amatya et al., 2021 ;
Bhuyan et al., 2023 ;Chandra et al., 2023 ;Comert et al., 2019 ;Feizizadeh
et al., 2017 ;Sreelakshmi and Vinod Chandra, 2024 ).
The studies above mainly focused on analyzing the spectral infor-
mation of satellite and UAV images from the same period. However,
some slopes are potential landslides that lack obvious geological features
such as cracks and surface exposure and are hard to directly recognize
through visual interpretation. Essentially, the deformation of these kinds
of slopes must be analyzed. The ﬁrst useful way to obtain deformationinformation is to analyze and interpret satellite and UAV images from
different periods. The core technology involves ﬁnding pixel differences
between images. For instance, in 2015, Hoelbling et al. (2015) performed
change detection of potential landslides covered with vegetation. In
2017, Feizizadeh et al. (2017) used an object-based method to analyze
multi-temporal images to detect changes in landslides, reaching an ac-
curacy of 94.74%. The second useful way to obtain deformation infor-
mation is to use synthetic aperture radar data, such as those from InSAR
(Hu et al., 2023 ;Chen et al., 2023 ;Confuorto et al., 2023 ;Li et al., 2024 ;
Fig. 9. The principle of pixel-based and object-based image recognition.
Fig. 10. The landslide recognition results in Aosta Valley, northwestern Italy: (a) pixel-based landslide recognition and (b) object-based landslide reco gnition
(modi ﬁed from H€olbling et al., 2012 ).R. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
6
Li et al., 2023a ;Xu et al., 2023 ;Yi et al., 2023a ;Yi et al., 2023b ). In 2018,
Rosi et al. (2018) updated the landslide inventory in the Tuscany region
by using InSAR with the persistent scatter interferometry technique to
detect changes in landslides. In 2021, Liu et al. (2021) proposed a new
InSAR-based procedure to detect landslides by integrating the geomor-
phological conditions from one period and changing the detection of
landslides from different periods. The integration of spectral information
and change detection can facilitate the recognition of landslides with
higher accuracy, as it enables the mutual veri ﬁcation of the recognition
results ( Dai et al., 2023 ;Phakdimek et al., 2023 ).
3.1.2. DL in landslide detection
Recently, DL methods have been gradually used. Among the DL
models, CNNs are the most widely used framework in landslide detection
like U-net, Seg-Net and Yolo ( Chandra et al., 2023 ;Han et al., 2023 ;Hu
et al., 2023 ;Li et al., 2023c ;Lu et al., 2023 ;Wang et al., 2020 ). The
details of the operation process are shown in Fig. 11 , and the following
discusses the main development process of DL applications in landslide
detection.
To verify the ef ﬁcacy and superiority of DL models, in 2019, the
performance of ML and DL in landslide detection were compared, and the
results showed that DL methods don't signi ﬁcantly outperform ML
methods because DL in landslide detection was still in its infancy
(Ghorbanzadeh et al., 2019 ). The design of the framework of DL, such as
the layer depth, input window size and training strategy, evidently in-
ﬂuence the outputs ( Ghorbanzadeh et al., 2019 ). For instance, RNN with
different designs perform differently in the mapping of landslides ( Wang
et al., 2020a,b ). A better understanding of DL models for landslide
detection is in high demand and still needs further research.
Based on the above background, in 2019, Lei et al. (2019) proposed a
novel approach integrating a fully convolutional network with pyramid
pooling to detect landslides, and the experimental results showed that the
methods were signi ﬁcantly improved and could outperform ML models,
yielding higher precision and lower overall error. In 2020, Prakash et al.
(2020) adapted a CNN using ResNet-34 blocks for feature extraction and
proved that results with higher accuracy could be obtained using thismethod compared with those of ML methods. In 2022, Ghorbanzadeh
et al. (2022) compared the performances of different object-based DL
models and found that ResU-Net-OBIA performed better than the
ResU-Net and OBIA approaches. In 2023, the Yolov7 algorithm based on
the SE squeezed attention mechanism is veri ﬁed to have higher gener-
alization and can be used to detect landslides more accurately with fewer
missed detections ( Liu et al., 2023a ). The research above all proves that a
reasonable DL framework is crucial, which can help improve the results
of landslide detection effectively with higher generalization ability and
replace state-of-the-art approaches.
3.2. Landslide susceptibility assessment
Landslide susceptibility (LS) re ﬂects the possibility of landslides
occurring in a speci ﬁc region. The process of landslide susceptibility
mapping (LSM) involves considering various in ﬂuencing factors, such as
elevation, slope angle, lithology, soil type, aspect, distance to roads,
distance to faults and distance to rivers, to analyze the likelihood oflandslides as the input parameters. In general, steeper slopes, weaker soil
shear strength, and closer proximity to rivers increase the LS of an area.
Correlation analyses are supposed to be carried out between different
inﬂuencing factors, with the strongly correlated in ﬂuencing factors being
eliminated and the weakly correlated in ﬂuencing factors being retained.
It's the critical standard for selecting input in ﬂuencing factors for LSM.
Analyzing LS can aid policy-makers in taking effective measures to
avoid disasters and reduce losses. The developments of LS studies are
shown in Fig. 12 . The conception was ﬁrst proposed in the 1960s.
Traditionally, LS has relied on statistical methods and expert systems,
where senior engineers determine the parameter values of the model
based on statistical results and practical experience. Currently, ML has
become an ef ﬁcient and objective approach to map LS. Figure 13 shows
the primary ﬂowchart of ML applied in LS. It has several advantages over
traditional methods, such as higher objectivity and ef ﬁciency.
3.2.1. ML in landslide susceptibility assessment
In 2012, Mamdani fuzzy algorithms based on expert opinions were
Fig. 11. Landslide recognition with a convolutional neural network: (a) process of the convolutional neural network and (b) two main pooling operations.R. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
7
used to successfully map LS in Sinop City, with an AUC value of 0.855,
which indicates good ﬁtness ( Akgun et al., 2012 ).Althuwaynee et al.
(2012) indicated that evidential belief functions can be effectively used
in LSM. Tien Bui et al. (2012a) investigated the application of an adaptive
neuro-fuzzy inference system for LSM and proved that the accuracy of the
results can be quite satisfactory. In 2013, Kayastha et al. (2013) applied
the analytical hierarchy process to LSM, and the analytical results were in
good agreement with those of past landslides. The results were further
validated by other research ( Chang et al., 2023 ; Dou et al., 2019; Nath
et al., 2024 ;Zhou et al., 2023 ). From the studies above, the evidential
belief functions, fuzzy models and analytical hierarchy process can all
perform well in the application of LSM.Toﬁnd the optimal models for LSM, most studies have focused on
comparing the performance of these models. In 2012, Tien Bui et al.
(2012b) compared the performance of evidential belief functions and
fuzzy logic models and found that although both models perform well in
terms of LSM, evidential belief functions are better, yielding higher ac-
curacy. Pourghasemi et al. (2012a,b) found that fuzzy logic models
perform better than the analytical hierarchy process in LSM. Of the three
models above, evidential belief functions have the highest prediction
capability. In addition to the models above, many researchers have also
investigated other statistical models, such as the index of entropy, con-
ditional probability models, frequency ratio, weights of evidence, cer-
tainty factor and index of entropy ( Devkota et al., 2013 ;Ozdemir and
Fig. 12. The development of landslide susceptibility over time (modi ﬁed from Dou et al., 2022 ).
Fig. 13. The main process of landslide susceptibility mapping using machine learning.R. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
8
Altural, 2013 ;Pourghasemi et al., 2012a,b ;Regmi et al., 2014 ). The re-
sults show that all the models above perform well and have similar ac-
curacy in terms of LSM.
Some researchers compared ML models with statistical models and
proved that ML models can obtain better results ( Akgun, 2012 ;Ali et al.,
2021 ;Felicísimo et al., 2013 ;Goetz et al., 2015 ;Huang et al., 2020 ;
Pradhan, 2013 ). Thus, ML models have become the main research di-
rection in LSM, and many studies have focused on comparisons between
different ML models to obtain the optimal model. Fig. 14 shows the
susceptibility mapping of landslides in Algeria using different ML models.
Different models perform differently in terms of the ﬁnal results. SVM,
LR, NB, RF and other ML models were compared, and the results proved
that all these ML models can perform LSM well; however, SVM, LR and
RF are promising methods with better outputs ( Chen et al., 2017 ;Guo
et al., 2021 ;Pradhan, 2013 ;Tsangaratos and Ilia, 2016 ;Youssef et al.,
2016 ;Youssef and Pourghasemi, 2021 ).
3.2.2. DL in landslide susceptibility assessment
DL has also increasingly been utilized in the ﬁeld of LSM. In 2014,
Conforti et al. (2014) used ANN for LSM in the Turbolo River catchment
in southern Italy and found that the results were satisfactory. This studydemonstrated the effectiveness of neural network models for LSM. In a
recent study by Dou et al. (2020) , DL models were applied to a case study
in the Muong Lay district, and LSM outputs with good ﬁtting to the
testing set were obtained. Some researchers have become interested in
whether DL models perform better than ML models. In 2020, Bui et al.
(2020) compared DL models with ML models, such as SVM, DT and RF,
for LSM. The results showed that the accuracies of the LSM results of the
DL models were 3% –7% higher than those of other ML models. In 2021,
Mandal et al. (2021) compared a CNN with ML models such as RF and
bagging models and found that the CNN outperformed the other models
and achieved higher precision. In summary, DL models have been proven
to be better, i.e., higher LSM accuracy, compared with ML models ( Jiang
et al., 2023 ). The performances of different DL models are also compared
in some studies ( Ge et al., 2023 ;Kim and Lee, 2024 ). Currently, the two
main DL frameworks used for LSM are CNNs and RNNs ( Fan and Hua,
2009 ;Wang et al., 2020a,b ;Yi et al., 2020 ;Mandal et al., 2021 ;Jiang
et al., 2023 ).
3.2.3. HM in landslide susceptibility assessment
In addition to using single model, many studies have explored the use
of HM to improve the LSM. Several studies demonstrated the superiority
Fig. 14. The susceptibility mapping of landslides in Algeria using different machine learning models: (a) logistic regression; (b) naïve Bayes; (c) support vector
machine and (d) random forest (modi ﬁed from Merghadi et al., 2020 ).R. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
9
of HM, including those by Pourghasemi et al. (2012) ,Chen et al. (2017) ,
Goetz et al. (2015) ,Trinh et al. (2023) ,Youssef et al. (2016) ,Liu et al.,
2024a ,Yang et al. (2024a) . In 2014, Althuwaynee et al. (2014) inte-
grated evidential belief functions and the analytical hierarchy process for
LSM and found that the novel model showed better performances than
that of a single LR model. In 2020, Wang et al. (2020a) compared HM (an
ensemble model of an SVM, an ANN and a gradient boosting DT) with
single ML models and found that the AUC value of the HM was 0.11 –0.35
higher than those of the ML models. Wang et al. (2020b) used an SVM
with bagging, boosting, and stacking ensemble ML framework with data
from a mountainous watershed in Japan to improve landslide assess-
ment. This HM is proven to be better. ( Di Napoli et al., 2020 ) found that
the integration of different ML models can produce robust and more
stable LSM outputs. Many studies also compared the performance of
different HMs and proved that accuracy differences still exist ( Balogun
et al., 2021 ;Chen et al., 2019 ;Chen et al., 2016 ;Nguyen et al., 2019 ;Tien
Bui et al., 2019 ).
3.3. Prediction of landslide displacement
Regional studies that focused on determining slopes with higher
landslide risk were described above (soft risk assessment approach). The
following section discussed studies related to mitigating potential haz-
ards for these slopes (hard risk assessment approach). Predicting the
evolution of these slopes is crucial for understanding the occurrence
process of landslide disasters and forecasting them in advance.
The evolution of landslides, especially accumulation landslides,
mainly contains three stages, i.e., the initial deformation stage, constant
deformation stage and accelerative deformation stage. In the later period
of the accelerative deformation stage, the tangent angle of deformation
approaches 90/C14, and the risk of landslide failure reaches the maximum.
The regulation shows that displacement is a very important factor in
characterizing the evolution of landslides. To obtain the evolution of
slopes with a high risk suffering from landslides, the main strategy is to
monitor the displacement of these slopes with equipment, such as GNSS,
displacement gauges, inclinometer and remote sensing, including InSAR
and UAV, and then use ML models to predict the future displacement
based on historical monitoring data ( Zhang and Huang, 2009 ;Casagli
et al., 2023 ;Xu et al., 2023 ). The development of landslide displacement
prediction studies is shown in Fig. 15 and the main ﬂowchart of landslide
displacement prediction is shown in Fig. 16 .
3.3.1. ML in the prediction of landslide displacement
In the 1980s and 1990s, the prediction of landslide displacement wasmainly based on statistical models like fuzzy theory and gray system
theory ( Fig. 15 ). Since the 1990s, research has increasingly focused on
nonlinearity, systematics and intelligence ( Fig. 15 ). The ﬁeld of AI,
especially relevant ML models, has been introduced into the displace-
ment prediction of landslides and has achieved good results ( Fig. 15 ). For
instance, in 2009, based on the time series of landslide displacement, Fan
and Hua (2009) used phase space reconstruction and an SVM to effec-
tively predict future landslide displacement. In 2013, Zhang et al. (2013)
used exponential smoothing and nonlinear regression analysis to predict
the displacement of landslides with high accuracy. Different ML models
perform differently in landslide displacement prediction ( Liu et al., 2012 ;
Miao et al., 2010 ). Some studies compared the performance of the
Gaussian process (GP), SVM and RBF networks and found that the GP
models performed better than the other two models ( Liu et al., 2012 ,
2014 ). As a result, to obtain better outputs, the selection of ML models
Fig. 15. The development of landslide displacement prediction over time (modi ﬁed from Dou et al., 2022 ).
Fig. 16. Flowchart of landslide displacement prediction using machine
learning: (a) model establishment and (b) model validation.R. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
10
should be considered carefully for landslide displacement prediction.
For landslides, especially reservoir landslides, rainfall and ﬂuctua-
tions in the reservoir water level are two main factors that induce land-
slide disasters ( Du et al., 2013 ;Zhang et al., 2019 ). Heavy rain or
reservoir impoundment will signi ﬁcantly decrease the shear strength of
rocks and soils ( Fig. 17 ). However, the methods above only predict
landslide displacement based on the time series of data and do not take
the impact of induced factors into account. The risk of potential land-
slides will be greatly underestimated with these prediction results. To
improve the prediction results, more research has begun to focus on
considering the essential factors mentioned above. In 2013, Peng et al.
(2013) used SVM to predict step-type landslide displacement. In this
study, landslide displacement was split into two terms, the trend term
and seasonal term ( Fig. 17 ). The two terms were predicted separately,
and then they were added to obtain the ﬁnal output ( Fig. 17 ). The trend
term is related to the geological conditions of landslides, while the sea-
sonal term has a high correlation with the in ﬂuencing factors of water
(Fig. 17 ). In 2014, Lian et al. (2014) proposed that the ensemble extreme
learning machine performs well for predicting the accumulative
displacement of landslides separated into trend terms and periodic terms.
In 2018, Miao et al. (2018) used a support vector regression model to
predict and separate landslide displacement into three terms: the trend
term, periodic term and random term. This study clari ﬁed that the
random term represents some uncertainties that will accelerate the
evolution of landslides, such as anthropogenic activities and other social
factors. In future research, to obtain prediction results with higher pre-cision, the separation of landslide displacement into two or more terms is
an indispensable step ( Yang et al., 2019a ;Zhang et al., 2021a ;Zhang
et al., 2021b ).3.3.2. DL in the prediction of landslide displacement
DL has also gradually been applied to the prediction of landslide
displacement. In 2015, ( Chen et al., 2015 ) used an RNN to predict the
displacement of the Baishuihe landslide and found that the prediction
accuracy was much higher than that of conventional ML models. In 2016,
Jiang and Chen (2016) demonstrated the effectiveness of generalized
regression neural networks on the prediction of landslide displacement.
In 2022, Huang et al. (2022) used a modi ﬁed CNN to accurately predict
landslide displacement. The feasibility and superiority of DL models has
also been validated by many other studies ( Chen et al., 2016 ;Jiang et al.,
2023b ;Li et al., 2016b ;Lian et al., 2016a,b ;Lin et al., 2023 ;Nava et al.,
2023 ;Yang et al., 2023 ;Yang et al., 2024b ,Yang et al., 2024c ;Zeng et al.,
2023
).
In 2018, Xu and Niu (2018) proposed an LSTM neural network to
predict the displacement of landslides. This dynamic model can
remember prior information and apply it to later outputs. In these
studies, it was found that dynamic models perform better than static
models. This conclusion was further validated in many other studies
(Duan et al., 2023 ;Li et al., 2023a ;Xie et al., 2019 ;Xing et al., 2019 ;Xing
et al., 2020 ;Yang et al., 2019b ). Moreover, for the same kinds of dynamic
models, LSTM performs better than the Elman network, which means
that different DL models perform differently even though they possess
the same functions ( Niu et al., 2021 ;Xu and Niu, 2018 ). LSTM has also
been used to compare with RNNs and other DL models ( Gao et al., 2022 ;
Niu et al., 2021 ). The results showed that LSTM performs best and can be
regarded as a main tool for landslide displacement prediction ( Zhang
et al., 2022 ;Duan et al., 2023 ;Li et al., 2023b ). From the above, it seems
that the Elman network is not an effective dynamic model. To address
this problem, in 2019, Zhang et al. (2019) proposed an improved Elman
Fig. 17. Displacement prediction of the Baishuihe landslide: (a) landslide displacement induced by rainfall and water level; (b) monitoring data and displa cement
decomposition; (c) prediction results of trend displacement and (d) prediction results of cumulative displacement (modi ﬁed from Wang et al., 2022 ).R. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
11
network based on the piecewise time weighted gradient by considering
the current and historical gradients simultaneously. The incorporation of
slope stability models that account for the dynamic changes in slope
gradients can result in more accurate modeling of real-world situations.
This suggests that modifying original models can be an effective strategy
for improving the precision of the ﬁnal prediction results. Recently,
Transformer model based on attention mechanism has also been utilized
in landslide displacement prediction, which can perform obviously better
than LSTM in the prediction of long-sequence time series ( Xi et al., 2023 ).
3.3.3. HM in the prediction of landslide displacement
Some studies have combined the advantages of several models to
improve the accuracy of landslide displacement prediction. In 2013,
Zhao et al. (2013) integrated the BP neural network with a Markov chain
for landslide displacement prediction. The former model is used to pre-
dict the displacement, and the latter model is used to analyze the range of
prediction errors and adjust the parameters of the models to obtain
minimal error values. This integrated model can effectively improve the
accuracy of the prediction outputs.
SVM models have been proven to be useful algorithms with good
performance in landslide displacement prediction. However, these
models rely heavily on the optimal selection of parameters. The param-
eter values of SVM models will greatly in ﬂuence the precision of the ﬁnal
output ( Li and Kong, 2014 ). In this case, to compensate for the disad-
vantages of SVM, some models that are good at optimizing the model
parameters can be integrated with the models to improve the perfor-mance. In 2014, Li and Kong (2014) integrated the genetic algorithm
with SVM models for parameter optimization and found that the inte-
grated models perform slightly better than single SVM model. The
effectiveness of these models was further validated in many other studies
(Wen et al., 2017 ;Zhu et al., 2018 ;Wang and Qiao, 2023 ).
Different HMs are also compared in some studies. In 2019, Liao et al.
(2019) compared the performance of GWO-ELM models with GWO-SVM
models for landslide prediction. The results showed that the former is
apparently more precise than the latter. The selection of an appropriate
HM is very important for the analysis results. In recent years, an
increasing number of studies have been conducted to ﬁnd the optimal
HMs for different application cases ( Dai et al., 2022 ;Gao et al., 2022 ;Guo
et al., 2020a,b ;Jiang et al., 2020 ;Jiang et al., 2022a ;Lin et al., 2022 ;Lu
et al., 2021 ;Luo et al., 2023 ;Wang et al., 2021 ;Zeng et al., 2022 ;Zhanget al., 2021a ;Zhang et al., 2020 ,Zhang et al., 2021c ,Zhang et al.,
2021d ).
3.4. Other applications
3.4.1. Sampling strategies
ML sampling strategies for landslide risk assessment are also very
important for the ﬁnal outputs ( Guo et al., 2024 ). For the samples after
feature extraction, which data types should be selected, which data will
be used as the training set and which data will be used as the testing set,
what is the basis for this selection strategy and how will it affect theresults are all key questions that need to be further discussed.
In 2017, Kornejady et al. (2017) used the maximum entropy model
for landslide susceptibility mapping of the Ziarat watershed in Iran. Two
different sampling strategies, named the Mahalanobis distance and
random sampling were used, and the analysis results were compared
with each other. The results showed that the former performed obviously
better. In 2020, Yi et al. (2020) compared the performance of ML models
using different scales of the training set (small scale, medium scale and
large scale) and found that small-scale datasets yield better performance
than large-scale datasets. As the scale increases, the accuracy of the ﬁnal
output slightly decreases. In 2020, Dou et al. (2020) analyzed the in ﬂu-
ence of different types of samples on the outputs of ML and DL as shown
inFig. 18 . The results showed that the sample type has a signi ﬁcant in-
ﬂuence on the accuracy of conventional ML models. For DL models,
especially CNNs, although the sample types are different, the outputs still
have similar precision, which means that sample types are less conse-
quential to the DL models. Currently, much research has focused on
ﬁnding the optimal sampling strategies ( Chang et al., 2023 ;Hong et al.,
2024 ;Ke et al., 2023 ;Khabiri et al., 2023 ;Liu et al., 2023a ;Ma et al.,
2023 ;Trinh et al., 2023 ;Xing et al., 2023 ).
3.4.2. Hyper-parameter optimization
Hyper-parameters are parameters that need to be set before the ML
process begins. For instance, the number of layers and nodes of a neural
network and the number of trees in a RF are all very important hyper-
parameters that need to be determined before calculations are per-
formed. Hyper-parameters are closely linked with the design of the
neural network framework and other ML models. Understanding the
inﬂuence of hyper-parameters is essential in comprehending the working
Fig. 18. Different sampling strategies: (a) centroid of a landslide body; (b) samples of a landslide body; (c) centroid of a landslide scarp and (d) samples of a landslide
scarp (modi ﬁed from Dou et al., 2020 ).R. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
12
mechanism of ML, and it helps improve the ﬁnal outputs.
In 2020, Sun et al. (2020) used a RF model for LSM, and a bayesian
model was used to optimize the hyper-parameters of the RF models. The
main aim is to obtain the optimal RF framework design to ensure an
output with high accuracy. Based on former studies, in 2021, Sun et al.
(2021) used a Bayesian model to optimize the hyper-parameters of RF
and LR simultaneously and compared the performance of the two
modiﬁed models. The results showed that both modi ﬁed models perform
better than the unmodi ﬁed models, and the LR models optimized by
Bayes perform much better than the modi ﬁed RF models. The optimi-
zation of hyper-parameters can help us design better model frameworks.
The optimization process is very useful to ensure the high precision of the
ﬁnal output.
3.4.3. Development of GUI
The development of GUIs is the ﬁnal step in AI applications. A GUI
encapsulates complex landslide detection, LSM and landslide displace-
ment prediction ML models and provides a visual platform for normal
users. GUI development is essential in realizing the popularization of AI
technology for the mitigation of landslide disasters.
In 2017, Lagomarsino et al. (2017) used MATLAB to encapsulate a RF
model and developed a GUI to obtain LSM. This GUI is a straightforward
and easy application providing a useful tool for normal users. In 2021,
Song et al. (2021) also encapsulated ML models to develop a GUI for LS
assessment. This GUI contains more useful functions, including param-
eter initialization and determination of landslide boundary conditions.
GUI development for landslides is still in its infancy. Advanced GUIs
containing functions such as landslide detection, LSM and landslide
displacement prediction, which can be operated easily by normal users,
are still in high demand in the ﬁeld of landslide disaster mitigation.
4. Discussions
This section discusses the challenges and provides suggestions for the
future development of AI applications in three aspects of landslide risk
assessment. Table 1 suggests the main algorithms used for the three key
areas and Fig. 19 summarizes the main challenges and opportunities
ahead.
4.1. Challenges and opportunities for landslide detection
The main types of landslide detection methods are shown in Table 2 .
Some major problems still exist for landslide detection by AI. First, soil
has strong spatial variability, i.e., soil parameters vary by location.
Moreover, the geological conditions also vary greatly in different regions.
These factors lead to obvious differences in the features of different
landslides. This greatly increases the dif ﬁculty of landslide detection.
Moreover, it still relies heavily on manual detection which is resource
intensive, time-consuming and subject to interpretation bias. Credible
general criteria for landslide detection is still lacking. The existing
determination methods are mostly based on engineering experience and
lack rigorous and systematic theoretical support. Second, although DL
models can ﬁlter out invalid features from training data and retain the
most useful features, there is still a lack of evidence to conclude that DL
models have a higher capability of landslide detection than that of ML
models. The application of DL models in this ﬁeld is still in its infancy.
How to design the framework of DL models appropriately to improve the
model performance and the generalization ability is still ambiguous and
requires more research. The future of landslide detection can be
described as follows:
(1) The design of a DL model framework, which contains layers,
nodes and hyper-parameters, is very important to ensure the ef-
ﬁciency and generalization of landslide detection results.
(2) Object-based DL models, especially object-based CNN models, will
be the main useful method for landslide detection. The integrationof object-based CNN models with other models and the appro-
priate modi ﬁcation of object-based CNN models will be the main
research directions to improve the generalizability, precision and
robustness of ML for landslide detection.
(3) The criteria applicable to determine different landslides in
different regions are very useful in accurate landslide recognition.
More general criteria are needed to consider the spatial variability
of soil parameters and the speci ﬁcity of landslide characteristics.
(4) The integration of spectral analysis and slope deformation infor-
mation will be essential in landslide recognition. Integrated
methods can play a role in mutual validation to ensure the pre-
cision of the detection results. Future research should focus on the
proposal of better algorithms to improve the accuracy of image
recognition and the interpretation precision of slope deformation
toﬁnd potential landslides, especially landslides covered with
vegetation.
(5) Few studies have focused on obtaining the rigorous boundaries,
volume and types of landslides. Future research should focus on
the proposal of useful and optimal algorithms to achieve this goal.
(6) It still lacks for advanced GUI tools for landslide detection. The
development of related products is very important to realize the
generalizability of AI technology for landslide detection.
4.2. Challenges and opportunities for LSM
Compared with other ML models, LR, RF and SVM models perform
better and have higher precision in LSM. HMs combine the advantages of
different ML models and perform better than single ML models. DL
models, especially CNN and RNN models, which have been widely used
are the advanced technologies in LSM, perform better than conventional
ML models. From the literature above, the future of landslide suscepti-
bility mapping can be described as follows:
(1) Hyper-parameter and sampling strategies are also very important
for the ﬁnal accuracy in LSM. Different RF frameworks, different
layers and different numbers of nodes in DL models have a sig-
niﬁcant in ﬂuence on the ﬁnal outputs. The appropriate framework
design is essential. Different selections, scales and types of training
sets also greatly in ﬂuence the ﬁnal outputs. Both hyper-parameter
and sampling strategies should be considered simultaneously in
LSM.
(2) DL models, especially CNN and RNN models, are the advanced
technologies for LSM at present. Future research should focus on
the optimization of these two models, including the appropriate
selection of hyper-parameters and sampling strategies, integration
with other advanced models and modi ﬁcations to improve the
robustness, generalizability and precision of the ﬁnal outputs.
(3) The strategies for integrating different ML models, setting hyper-
parameters and training sets still need further research. The kinds
of strategies truly needed in different situations still lack discus-
sion. Further studies for ﬁnding the optimal strategies are still
needed.
(4) All the ML models described considered several in ﬂuencing fac-
tors of landslides to analyze and obtain the LSM results. However,
few studies clari ﬁed why these factors were selected over otherTable 1
The main ML models summarized for the three application areas.
Field Models with best performances
Landslide detection Support vector machine, convolutional neural network,
recurrent neural network and related hybrid models
Landslide susceptibility
mappingSupport vector machine, logistic regression, random
forest, convolutional neural network, recurrent neuralnetwork and related hybrid models
Landslide displacement
predictionLong short-term memory, transformer and related hybrid
modelsR. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
13
factors and exactly how many in ﬂuencing factors should be
selected. Furthermore, the obtained LSM results are static and
only have reference values for policy-making in a given period.
For landslides, especially reservoir landslides, rainfall, ﬂuctua-
tions in the water level, earthquakes and anthropogenic factors
will all cause changes in in ﬂuencing factors such as the geological
conditions, shear strength and water content of soil. It is very
important to obtain a dynamic LSM that has long-term reference
values for the government by taking the in ﬂuencing factors into
account. In addition to improving the accuracy, researchers
should also focus on improving the computational ef ﬁciency of
models, which is often overlooked.
(5) Advanced GUI tools are also rare for this ﬁeld. The development of
related products can help to realize the generalizability of AI
technology to LSMs. For the calculation algorithms, in addition to
accuracy, researchers should also improve the calculation ef ﬁ-
ciency of the models, which is rarely considered.
4.3. Challenges and opportunities for landslide displacement prediction
The current research mainly focuses on the prediction of single pointlandslide displacement by GNSS. The monitoring and prediction results
can only re ﬂect the deformation of the instrument installation position
and cannot represent the overall deformation characteristics of a land-
slide. Sudden deformation rate changes of individual points do not mean
that the overall deformation of a landslide follows this trend. This is very
likely to lead to the misjudgment of landslide deformation and
instability.
In recent years, non-contact monitoring techniques like InSAR, UAV
and terrestrial laser scanning have been gradually used to get the su-
perﬁcial deformation of landslides for different periods ( Jiang et al.,
2021 ;Jiang et al., 2022b ;Kulshrestha et al., 2022 ). The displacement
prediction through the data obtained by non-contact monitoring tech-
niques is still rarely considered and only a few studies have already
discussed this research direction using DL ( Kulshrestha et al., 2022 ).
As a result, the future of landslide displacement prediction can be
described as follows:
(1) Most studies divided landslide displacement prediction into two
parts, a trend term and a periodic term. The trend term is corre-
lated with geological conditions, and the periodic term is deter-
mined by the periodic rainfall or ﬂuctuation of the water level of
Fig. 19. The conclusions of current practices and future work.R. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
14
the reservoir. Actually, landslide displacement is not only in ﬂu-
enced by these factors. Many uncertainty factors, such as earth-
quake and anthropogenic factors should also be considered. Thus,
some scholars divided landslide displacement prediction into
three parts: a trend term, a periodic term and an uncertainty term.
It is still dif ﬁcult to quantitatively analyze the uncertainty term,
which needs to be considered carefully in further research.
(2) For the prediction of landslide displacement, LSTM neural
network is a dynamic DL model that has been proven to be the
most useful model and has been widely used in many studies in
recent years. Future research should mainly focus on the optimi-
zation of DL models, especially LSTM, by integrating this model
with other advanced models or modifying the framework of the
model itself.
(3) The DL models like RNN and LSTM can't predict the long sequence
time series well. Transformer model based on attention mecha-
nism can solve these problems effectively to predict the evolution
of landslide in long term. Informer performed better than the
Transformer. It represents the main techniques used in the future.
(4) It is important to obtain the time series of the three-dimensional
deformation ﬁeld of a landslide in a reservoir area and then
carry out the intelligent prediction of the future three-dimensional
deformation ﬁeld of the landslide based on ML and DL models.
The predictions are not only limited to single point displacements,
but also to super ﬁcial deformation obtained by non-contact
monitoring techniques or deformation ﬁelds.
(5) There is a high demand for the development of useful GUI tools for
normal users to directly predict the displacement of landslides.
This GUI can be built in combination with the establishment of an
early warning system for landslide disasters.
4.4. Other recommendations
Many studies have been conducted to enhance the performance of ML
models for landslide analyses through DL, HMs, and hyper-parameteroptimization. However, these approaches do not provide a clear under-
standing of the underlying mechanisms of landslides, which is necessary
for informed decisions to prevent or mitigate landslide risks. To address
this, the research should integrate ML models with physical models of
landslides to create more explainable AI models ( Guo et al., 2023 ). This
would enable a deeper understanding of the mechanisms behind land-
slides and more effective policy-making. For the region with limited data,
transfer learning can be used as a useful tool to solve these problems.
5. Conclusions
This paper reviewed hundreds of literatures related to applications of
AI in landslide risk assessment. In recent years, there has been a sharp
increase in number of research papers published on this topic. Three key
prominent areas including landslide detection, landslide susceptibility
mapping and prediction of landslide displacement were discussed where
AI applications have been applied prominently.
Recently, DL methods have gradually replaced statistical methods and
ML methods with better performance. CNNs and RNNs are two dominant
DL methods used in the three areas. In landslide detection, CNNs are
mainly used with satisfactory results; in landslide susceptibility assess-
ment, both CNNs and RNNs are mainly used, and in landslide displace-
ment prediction, RNNs are mainly used. RF, LR and SVM are also proved
well in LSM. LSTM and Transformer are both reliable in landslide
displacement prediction which can overcome the forgetting problem and
predict the long-sequence time series. The method for construction of DLframework has a great impact on the ﬁnal results.
HM combines the advantages of different models which can effec-
tively improve the outputs. The selection of appropriate HM is critical for
the future development of AI applications. The sampling training stra-
tegies, hyper-parameters optimization and the generalization ability of
these models are also crucial. Advanced GUI tools in this ﬁeld should be
developed to realize the widespread use of relevant techniques by normal
users.
Overall, the application of AI techniques in the three aspects of
landslide risk assessment has yielded successful and promising results,
which can describe the nonlinear relationships of soil and rock structures
and predisposing factors. The explainable AI combining with physical
meaning and transfer learning should be considered carefully in future
research.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Rongjie He: Writing –original draft, Methodology, Investigation,
Formal analysis, Data curation. Wengang Zhang: Writing –review &
editing, Resources, Formal analysis. Jie Dou:
Writing –review &editing,
Visualization, Formal analysis. Nan Jiang: Validation, Software, Inves-
tigation. Huaixian Xiao: Visualization, Investigation, Formal analysis.
Jiawen Zhou: Writing –review &editing, Supervision, Project admin-
istration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂuence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (U2240221 and 52379105) and the Sichuan Youth Science andTechnology Innovation Research Team Project (2020JDTD0006). Crit-
ical comments by the anonymous reviewers greatly improved the initial
manuscript.Table 2
Summary of landslide types and recognition methods.
Types Recognition indicators Main recognition
methods
Exposed landslides
without deformationPresents a circular chair shape,
with landslide rear wall,landslide sidewall andmultilevel abutment, invisibledeformationSatellite and UAV
images from oneperiod;LiDAR point cloud
Exposed landslides
with deformationPresents a circular chair shape,
with landslide rear wall,landslide sidewall andmultilevel abutment, visibledeformationSatellite and UAV
images from differentperiods;LiDAR cloud pointfrom different periods;SAR images such asInSAR to interpret thedeformation
Landslides covered
with vegetation andwithout deformationCracks and small-scale collapse
at the front edge, invisibledeformationSatellite and UAV
images from oneperiod;LiDAR cloud point toremove surfacevegetation
Landslides covered
with vegetation and
with deformationCracks and small-scale collapse
at the front edge, visible
deformationLiDAR cloud point
from different periods;
Satellite and UAV
images from differentperiods;SAR images such asInSAR to interpret thedeformation
Slopes with the
possibility of
landslide occurrenceNo morphological or
deformation informationGeophysical
exploration and
drillingR. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
15
References
Akgun, A., 2012. A comparison of landslide susceptibility maps produced by logistic
regression, multi-criteria decision, and likelihood ratio methods: a case study at
_Izmir, Turkey. Landslides 9 (1), 93 –106. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10346-011-0283-
7.
Akgun, A., Sezer, E.A., Nefeslioglu, H.A., Gokceoglu, C., Pradhan, B., 2012. An easy-to-use
MATLAB program (MamLand) for the assessment of landslide susceptibility using a
Mamdani fuzzy algorithm. Comput. Geosci. 38 (1), 23 –34.https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cageo.2011.04.012 .
Ali, S.A., Parvin, F., Vojtekov /C19a, J., Costache, R., Linh, N.T.T., Pham, Q.B., Vojtek, M.,
Gigovi /C19c, L., Ahmad, A., Ghorbani, M.A., 2021. GIS-based landslide susceptibility
modeling: a comparison between fuzzy multi-criteria and machine learning
algorithms. Geosci. Front. 12 (2), 857 –876. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.gsf.2020.09.004 .
Althuwaynee, O.F., Pradhan, B., Park, H., Lee, J.H., 2014. A novel ensemble bivariate
statistical evidential belief function with knowledge-based analytical hierarchyprocess and multivariate statistical logistic regression for landslide susceptibility
mapping. Catena 114, 21 –36.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2013.10.011 .
Althuwaynee, O.F., Pradhan, B., Lee, S., 2012. Application of an evidential belief function
model in landslide susceptibility mapping. Comput. Geosci. 44, 120 –135. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cageo.2012.03.003 .
Amatya, P., Kirschbaum, D., Stanley, T., Tanyas, H., 2021. Landslide mapping using
object-based image analysis and open source tools. Eng. Geol. 282, 106000. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.enggeo.2021.106000 .
Baghbani, A., Choudhury, T., Costa, S., Reiner, J., 2022. Application of arti ﬁcial
intelligence in geotechnical engineering: a state-of-the-art review. Earth Sci. Rev.228, 103991. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.earscirev.2022.103991 .
Balogun, A., Rezaie, F., Pham, Q.B., Gigovi /C19c, L., Drobnjak, S., Aina, Y.A., Panahi, M.,
Yekeen, S.T., Lee, S., 2021. Spatial prediction of landslide susceptibility in western
Serbia using hybrid support vector regression (SVR) with GWO, BAT and COA
algorithms. Geosci. Front. 12 (3), 101104. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.gsf.2020.10.009 .
Bhuyan, K., Tanyas ¸, H., Nava, L., Puliero, S., Meena, S.R., Floris, M., van Westen, C.,
Catani, F., 2023. Generating multi-temporal landslide inventories through a general
deep transfer learning strategy using HR EO data. Sci. Rep. 13 (1), 162. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-27352-y .
Bui, D.T., Tsangaratos, P., Nguyen, V., Liem, N.V., Trinh, P.T., 2020. Comparing the
prediction performance of a Deep Learning Neural Network model with conventionalmachine learning models in landslide susceptibility assessment. Catena 188, 104426.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2019.104426 .
Casagli, N., Intrieri, E., Tofani, V., Gigli, G., Raspini, F., 2023. Landslide detection,
monitoring and prediction with remote-sensing techniques. Nat. Rev. Earth Environ.
4 (1), 51 –64.https://doi.org/10.1038/s43017-022-00373-x .
Chandra, N., Sawant, S., Vaidya, H., 2023. An ef ﬁcient U-net model for improved
landslide detection from satellite images. PFG –Journal of Photogrammetry, Remote
Sensing and Geoinformation Science 91 (1), 13 –28.https://doi.org/10.1007/
s41064-023-00232-4 .
Chang, Z., Huang, J., Huang, F., Bhuyan, K., Meena, S.R., Catani, F., 2023. Uncertainty
analysis of non-landslide sample selection in landslide susceptibility prediction using
slope unit-based machine learning models. Gondwana Res. 117, 307 –320. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.gr.2023.02.007 .
Chen, H., Zeng, Z., Tang, H., 2015. Landslide deformation prediction based on recurrent
neural network. Neural Process. Lett. 41 (2), 169 –178. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11063-013-9318-5 .
Chen, J., Zeng, Z., Jiang, P., Tang, H., 2016. Application of multi-gene genetic
programming based on separable functional network for landslide displacement
prediction. Neural Comput. Appl. 27 (6), 1771 –1784. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00521-015-1976-y .
Chen, L., Zhao, C., Chen, H., Kang, Y., Li, B., Liu, X., 2023. The detection and control
factor analysis of active landslides in guizhou province, China, using sentinel-1 SAR
imagery. Rem. Sens. 15 (23), 5468. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs15235468 .
Chen, W., Shahabi, H., Shirzadi, A., Hong, H., Akgun, A., Tian, Y., Liu, J., Zhu, A., Li, S.,
2019. Novel hybrid arti ﬁcial intelligence approach of bivariate statistical-methods-
based kernel logistic regression classi ﬁer for landslide susceptibility modeling. Bull.
Eng. Geol. Environ. 78 (6), 4397 –4419. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10064-018-1401-
8.
Chen, W., Xie, X., Wang, J., Pradhan, B., Hong, H., Bui, D.T., Duan, Z., Ma, J., 2017.
A comparative study of logistic model tree, random forest, and classi ﬁcation and
regression tree models for spatial prediction of landslide susceptibility. Catena 151,
147–160. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2016.11.032 .
Chen, X., Chen, W., 2021. GIS-based landslide susceptibility assessment using optimized
hybrid machine learning methods. Catena 196, 104833. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.catena.2020.104833 .
Comert, R., Avdan, U., Gorum, T., Nefeslioglu, H.A., 2019. Mapping of shallow landslides
with object-based image analysis from unmanned aerial vehicle data. Eng. Geol. 260,
105264. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enggeo.2019.105264 .
Conforti, M., Pascale, S., Robustelli, G., Sdao, F., 2014. Evaluation of prediction capability
of the arti ﬁcial neural networks for mapping landslide susceptibility in the Turbolo
River catchment (northern Calabria, Italy). Catena 113, 236 –250. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.catena.2013.08.006 .
Confuorto, P., Casagli, N., Casu, F., De Luca, C., Del Soldato, M., Festa, D., Lanari, R.,
Manzo, M., Onorato, G., Raspini, F., 2023. Sentinel-1 P-SBAS data for the update of
the state of activity of national landslide inventory maps. Landslides 20 (5),
1083 –1097. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10346-022-02024-0 .Dai, K., Li, Z., Xu, Q., Tomas, R., Li, T., Jiang, L., Zhang, J., Yin, T., Wang, H., 2023.
Identi ﬁcation and evaluation of the high mountain upper slope potential landslide
based on multi-source remote sensing: the Aniangzhai landslide case study.
Landslides 20 (7), 1405 –1417. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10346-023-02044-4 .
Dai, Y., Dai, W., Yu, W., Bai, D., 2022. Determination of landslide displacement warning
thresholds by applying DBA-LSTM and numerical simulation algorithms. Appl. Sci.-Basel 12 (13), 6690. https://doi.org/10.3390/app12136690 .
Das, S., Sharma, P., Pain, A., Kanungo, D.P., Sarkar, S., 2023. Deep learning based
landslide detection using open-source resources: opportunities and challenges. Earth
Sci. Inform. 16 (4), 4035 –4052. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12145-023-01141-1 .
Devkota, K.C., Regmi, A.D., Pourghasemi, H.R., Yoshida, K., Pradhan, B., Ryu, I.C.,
Dhital, M.R., Althuwaynee, O.F., 2013. Landslide susceptibility mapping using
certainty factor, index of entropy and logistic regression models in GIS and their
comparison at Mugling –Narayanghat road section in Nepal Himalaya. Nat. Hazards
65 (1), 135
–165. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-012-0347-6 .
Di Napoli, M., Carotenuto, F., Cevasco, A., Confuorto, P., Di Martire, D., Firpo, M.,
Pepe, G., Raso, E., Calcaterra, D., 2020. Machine learning ensemble modelling as a
tool to improve landslide susceptibility mapping reliability. Landslides 17 (8),1897 –1914. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10346-020-01392-9 .
Dikshit, A., Pradhan, B., Alamri, A.M., 2021. Pathways and challenges of the application
of arti ﬁcial intelligence to geohazards modelling. Gondwana Res. 100, 290 –301.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gr.2020.08.007 .
Dou, J., Xiang, Z., Xu, Q., Zheng, P., Wang, X., Su, A., Liu, J., Luo, W., 2022. Application
and development trend of machine learning in landslide intelligent disaster
prevention and mitigation. Earth Science 48 (5), 1657 –1674. https://doi.org/
10.3799/dqkx.2022.419 .
Dou, J., Yunus, A.P., Merghadi, A., Shirzadi, A., Nguyen, H., Hussain, Y., Avtar, R.,
Chen, Y., Pham, B.T., Yamagishi, H., 2020. Different sampling strategies for
predicting landslide susceptibilities are deemed less consequential with deep
learning. Sci. Total Environ. 720, 137320. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.scitotenv.2020.137320 .
Du, J., Yin, K., Lacasse, S., 2013. Displacement prediction in colluvial landslides, three
gorges reservoir, China. Landslides 10 (2), 203 –218. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10346-012-0326-8 .
Duan, G., Su, Y., Fu, J., 2023. Landslide displacement prediction based on multivariate
LSTM model. Int. J. Environ. Res. Publ. Health 20 (2), 1167. https://doi.org/
10.3390/ijerph20021167 .
Fan, Q., Hua, X., 2009. A novel method for forecasting landslide displacement based on
phase space reconstruction and support vector machine. Geomatics Inf. Sci. Wuhan
Univ. 34 (2), 248 –251.
Feizizadeh, B., Blaschke, T., Tiede, D., Moghaddam, M.H.R., 2017. Evaluating fuzzy
operators of an object-based image analysis for detecting landslides and theirchanges. Geomorphology 293, 240 –254. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.geomorph.2017.06.002 .
Felicísimo, /C19A.M., Cuartero, A., Remondo, J., Quir /C19os, E., 2013. Mapping landslide
susceptibility with logistic regression, multiple adaptive regression splines,
classi ﬁcation and regression trees, and maximum entropy methods: a comparative
study. Landslides 10 (2), 175 –189. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10346-012-0320-1 .
Froude, M.J., Petley, D.N., 2018. Global fatal landslide occurrence from 2004 to 2016.
Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 18 (8), 2161 –2181. https://doi.org/10.5194/nhess-18-
2161-2018 .
Gao, Y., Chen, X., Tu, R., Chen, G., Luo, T., Xue, D., 2022. Prediction of landslide
displacement based on the combined VMD-stacked LSTM-TAR model. Rem. Sens. 14
(5), 1164. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs14051164 .
Ge, Y., Liu, G., Tang, H., Zhao, B., Xiong, C., 2023. Comparative analysis of ﬁve
convolutional neural networks for landslide susceptibility assessment. Bull. Eng.
Geol. Environ. 82 (10), 377. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10064-023-03408-9 .
Ghorbanzadeh, O., Blaschke, T., Gholamnia, K., Meena, S., Tiede, D., Aryal, J., 2019.
Evaluation of different machine learning methods and deep-learning convolutionalneural networks for landslide detection. Rem. Sens. 11 (2), 196. https://doi.org/
10.3390/rs11020196 .
Ghorbanzadeh, O., Shahabi, H., Crivellari, A., Homayouni, S., Blaschke, T., Ghamisi, P.,
2022. Landslide detection using deep learning and object-based image analysis.
Landslides 19 (4), 929 –
939. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10346-021-01843-x .
Goetz, J.N., Brenning, A., Petschko, H., Leopold, P., 2015. Evaluating machine learning
and statistical prediction techniques for landslide susceptibility modeling. Comput.
Geosci. 81, 1 –11.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cageo.2015.04.007 .
Guo, Z., Chen, L., Gui, L., Du, J., Yin, K., Hien, M.D., 2020a. Landslide displacement
prediction based on variational mode decomposition and WA-GWO-BP model.
Landslides 17 (3), 567 –583. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10346-019-01314-4 .
Guo, Z., Chen, L., Yin, K., Shrestha, D.P., Zhang, L., 2020b. Quantitative risk assessment of
slow-moving landslides from the viewpoint of decision-making: a case study of the
Three Gorges Reservoir in China. Eng. Geol. 273, 105667. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.enggeo.2020.105667 .
Guo, Z., Shi, Y., Huang, F., Fan, X., Huang, J., 2021. Landslide susceptibility zonation
method based on C5.0 decision tree and K-means cluster algorithms to improve theefﬁciency of risk management. Geosci. Front. 12 (6), 101249. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.gsf.2021.101249 .
Guo, Z., Tian, B., He, J., Xu, C., Zeng, T., Zhu, Y., 2023. Hazard assessment for regional
typhoon-triggered landslides by using physically-based model - a case study from
southeastern China. Georisk 17 (4), 740 –754. https://doi.org/10.1080/
17499518.2023.2188465 .
Guo, Z., Tian, B., Zhu, Y., He, J., Zhang, T., 2024. How do the landslide and non-landslide
sampling strategies impact landslide susceptibility assessment? A catchment-scale
case study from China. J. Rock Mech. Geotech. Eng. 16 (3), 877 –894. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jrmge.2023.07.026 .R. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
16
Han, Z., Fang, Z., Li, Y., Fu, B., 2023. A novel Dynahead-Yolo neural network for the
detection of landslides with variable proportions using remote sensing images. Front.
Earth Sci. 10, 1077153. https://doi.org/10.3389/feart.2022.1077153 .
Hoelbling, D., Friedl, B., Eisank, C., 2015. An object-based approach for semi-automated
landslide change detection and attribution of changes to landslide classes in northern
Taiwan. Earth Sci. Inform. 8 (2), 327 –335. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12145-015-
0217-3 .
H€olbling, D., Füreder, P., Antolini, F., Cigna, F., Casagli, N., Lang, S., 2012. A semi-
automated object-based approach for landslide detection validated by persistent
scatterer interferometry measures and landslide inventories. Rem. Sens. 4 (5),
1310 –1336. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs4051310 .
Hong, H., Wang, D., Zhu, A., Wang, Y., 2024. Landslide susceptibility mapping based on
the reliability of landslide and non-landslide sample. Expert Syst. Appl. 243, 122933.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.122933 .
Hu, Z., Yi, B., Li, H., Zhong, C., Gao, P., Chen, J., Yao, Q., Guo, H., 2023. Comparative
evaluation of state-of-the-art semantic segmentation networks for long-term landslide
map production. Sensors 23 (22), 9041. https://doi.org/10.3390/s23229041 .
Huang, D., He, J., Song, Y., Guo, Z., Huang, X., Guo, Y., 2022. Displacement prediction of
the muyubao landslide based on a GPS time-series analysis and temporal
convolutional network model. Rem. Sens. 14 (11), 2656. https://doi.org/10.3390/
rs14112656 .
Huang, F., Cao, Z., Guo, J., Jiang, S., Li, S., Guo, Z., 2020. Comparisons of heuristic,
general statistical and machine learning models for landslide susceptibility predictionand mapping. Catena 191, 104580. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2020.104580 .
Jiang, N., Li, H., Li, C., Xiao, H., Zhou, J., 2022a. A fusion method using terrestrial laser
scanning and unmanned aerial vehicle photogrammetry for landslide deformation
monitoring under complex terrain conditions. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Rem. Sens. 60,
4707214. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2022.3181258 .
Jiang, H., Li, Y., Zhou, C., Hong, H., Glade, T., Yin, K., 2020. Landslide displacement
prediction combining LSTM and svr algorithms: a case study of shengjibao landslidefrom the three gorges reservoir area. Appl. Sci.-Basel 10 (21), 7830. https://doi.org/
10.3390/app10217830 .
Jiang, N., Li, H., Hu, Y., Zhang, J., Dai, W., Li, C., Zhou, J., 2021. A monitoring method
integrating terrestrial laser scanning and unmanned aerial vehicles for different
landslide deformation patterns. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Rem. Sens. 14,10242 –10255. https://doi.org/10.1109/JSTARS.2021.3117946 .
Jiang, P., Chen, J., 2016. Displacement prediction of landslide based on generalized
regression neural networks with K-fold cross-validation. Neurocomputing 198,
40–47.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2015.08.118 .
Jiang, Y., Liao, L., Luo, H., Zhu, X., Lu, Z., 2023a. Multi-scale response analysis and
displacement prediction of landslides using deep learning with jtfa: a case study in
the three gorges reservoir, China. Rem. Sens. 15 (16), 3995. https://doi.org/
10.3390/rs15163995 .
Jiang, S., Liu, H., Lian, M., Lu, C., Zhang, S., Li, J., Li, P., 2022b. Rock slope displacement
prediction based on multi-source information fusion and SSA-DELM model. Front.
Environ. Sci. 10, 982069. https://doi.org/10.3389/fenvs.2022.982069 .
Jiang, Z., Wang, M., Liu, K., 2023b. Comparisons of convolutional neural network and
other machine learning methods in landslide susceptibility assessment: a case study
in pingwu. Rem. Sens. 15 (3), 798. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs15030798 .
Jordan, M.I., Mitchell, T.M., 2015. Machine learning: trends, perspectives, and prospects.
Science 349 (6245), 255 –260. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa8415 .
Kadavi, P.R., Lee, C., Lee, S., 2018. Application of ensemble-based machine learning
models to landslide susceptibility mapping. Rem. Sens. 10 (8), 1252. https://doi.org/
10.3390/rs10081252 .
Kayastha, P., Dhital, M.R., De Smedt, F., 2013. Application of the analytical hierarchy
process (AHP) for landslide susceptibility mapping: a case study from the Tinau
watershed, west Nepal. Comput. Geosci. 52, 398 –408. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cageo.2012.11.003
.
Ke, C., He, S., Qin, Y., 2023. Comparison of natural breaks method and frequency ratio
dividing attribute intervals for landslide susceptibility mapping. Bull. Eng. Geol.
Environ. 82 (10), 384. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10064-023-03392-0 .
Khabiri, S., Crawford, M.M., Koch, H.J., Haneberg, W.C., Zhu, Y., 2023. An assessment of
negative samples and model structures in landslide susceptibility characterization
based on bayesian network models. Rem. Sens. 15 (12), 3200. https://doi.org/
10.3390/rs15123200 .
Kim, J., Lee, S., 2024. Comparative study of deep neural networks for landslide
susceptibility assessment: a case study of pyeongchang-gun, South Korea.
Sustainability 16 (1), 245. https://doi.org/10.3390/su16010245 .
Kornejady, A., Ownegh, M., Bahremand, A., 2017. Landslide susceptibility assessment
using maximum entropy model with two different data sampling methods. Catena
152, 144 –162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2017.01.010 .
Kulshrestha, A., Chang, L., Stein, A., 2022. Use of LSTM for sinkhole-related anomaly
detection and classi ﬁcation of InSAR deformation time series. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl.
Earth Obs. Rem. Sens. 15, 4559 –4570. https://doi.org/10.1109/
JSTARS.2022.3180994 .
Lagomarsino, D., Tofani, V., Segoni, S., Catani, F., Casagli, N., 2017. A tool for
classi ﬁcation and regression using random forest methodology: applications to
landslide susceptibility mapping and soil thickness modeling. Environ. Model. Assess.
22 (3), 201 –214. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10666-016-9538-y .
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., Hinton, G., 2015. Deep learning. Nature 521 (7553), 436 –444.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14539 .
Lei, T., Zhang, Y., Lv, Z., Li, S., Liu, S., Nandi, A.K., 2019. Landslide inventory mapping
from bitemporal images using deep convolutional neural networks. Geosci. Rem.Sens. Lett. IEEE 16 (6), 982 –986. https://doi.org/10.1109/LGRS.2018.2889307 .Lei, Y., Huang, J., Cui, Y., Jiang, S., Wu, S., Ching, J., 2023. Time capsule for landslide risk
assessment. Georisk 17 (4), 613 –634. https://doi.org/10.1080/
17499518.2023.2164899 .
Li, D., Tang, X., Tu, Z., Fang, C., Ju, Y., 2023a. Automatic detection of forested landslides:
a case study in jiuzhaigou county, China. Rem. Sens. 15 (15), 3850. https://doi.org/
10.3390/rs15153850 .
Li, J., Cassidy, M.J., Huang, J., Zhang, L., Kelly, R., 2016a. Probabilistic identi ﬁcation of
soil strati ﬁcation. Geotechnique 66 (1), 16 –26.https://doi.org/10.1680/jgeot.14 ,
242.
Li, X., Cheng, X., Chen, W., Chen, G., Liu, S., 2015. Identi ﬁcation of forested landslides
using LiDar data, object-based image analysis, and machine learning algorithms.Rem. Sens. 7 (8), 9705 –9726. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs70809705 .
Li, Y., Fu, P., Ji, W., Shi, S., Zhang, Y., Zhang, T., 2016b. Predictive method of nonlinear
system based on arti ﬁcial neural network and SVM. Oxid. Commun. 39 (1A),
1226 –1235 .
Li, X.Z., Kong, J.M., 2014. Application of GA-SVM method with parameter optimization
for landslide development prediction. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 14 (3), 525 –533.
https://doi.org/10.5194/nhess-14-525-2014 .
Li, Z., Dai, K., Deng, J., Liu, C., Shi, X., Tang, G., Yin, T., 2023c. Identifying potential
landslides in steep mountainous areas based on improved seasonal interferometrystacking-InSAR. Rem. Sens. 15 (13), 3278. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs15133278 .
Li, Y., Feng, X., Li, Y., Jiang, W., Yu, W., 2024. Detection and analysis of potential
landslides based on SBAS-InSAR technology in alpine canyon region. Environ. Sci.Pollut. Res. 31 (4), 6492 –6510. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-023-31473-w .
Li, L., Wang, C., Wen, Z., Gao, J., Xia, M., 2023b. Landslide displacement prediction based
on the ICEEMDAN, ApEn and the CNN-LSTM models. J. Mt. Sci. 20 (5), 1220 –1231.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11629-022-7606-0 .
Lian, C., Chen, C.L.P., Zeng, Z., Yao, W., Tang, H., 2016a. Prediction intervals for
landslide displacement based on switched neural networks. IEEE Trans. Reliab. 65
(3), 1483 –1495. https://doi.org/10.1109/TR.2016.2570540 .
Lian, C., Zeng, Z., Yao, W., Tang, H., Chen, C.L.P., 2016b. Landslide displacement
prediction with uncertainty based on neural networks with random hidden weights.
IEEE Transact. Neural Networks Learn. Syst. 27 (12), 2683 –2695. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TNNLS.2015.2512283 .
Lian, C., Zeng, Z., Yao, W., Tang, H., 2014. Ensemble of extreme learning machine for
landslide displacement prediction based on time series analysis. Neural Comput.
Appl. 24 (1), 99 –107. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-013-1446-3 .
Liao, K., Wu, Y., Li, L., Miao, F., Xue, Y., 2019. Displacement prediction model of landslide
based on time series and GWO-ELM. J. Cent. S. Univ. 50 (3), 619 –626. https://
doi.org/10.11817/j.issn.1672-7207.2019.03.015 .
Lin, Q., Yang, Z., Huang, J., Deng, J., Chen, L., Zhang, Y., 2023. A landslide displacement
prediction model based on the ICEEMDAN method and the TCN –BiLSTM combined
neural network. Water 15 (24), 4247. https://doi.org/10.3390/w15244247 .
Lin, Z., Sun, X., Ji, Y., 2022. Landslide displacement prediction based on time series
analysis and double-BiLSTM model. Int. J. Environ. Res. Publ. Health 19 (4), 2077.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19042077 .
Liu, Q., Wu, T., Deng, Y., Liu, Z., 2023a. Intelligent identi ﬁcation of landslides in loess
areas based on the improved YOLO algorithm: a case study of loess landslides in Baoji
City. J. Mt. Sci. 20 (11), 3343 –3359. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11629-023-8128-0 .
Liu, B., Guo, H., Li, J., Ke, X., He, X., 2024a. Application and interpretability of ensemble
learning for landslide susceptibility mapping along the Three Gorges Reservoir area,
China. Nat. Hazards 120, 4601 –4632. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-023-06374-
3.
Liu, W., Leung, Y., 2018. Characterising three-dimensional anisotropic spatial correlation
of soil properties through in situ test results. Geotechnique 68 (9), 805 –819. https://
doi.org/10.1680/jgeot.16.P.336 .
Liu, X., Xu, L., Zhang, J., 2024b. Landslide detection with Mask R-CNN using complex
background enhancement based on multi-scale samples. Geomatics, Nat. Hazards
Risk 15 (1), 2300823. https://doi.org/10.1080/19475705.2023.2300823 .
Liu, X., Zhao, C., Zhang, Q., Lu, Z., Li, Z., Yang, C., Zhu, W., Liu-Zeng, J., Chen, L., Liu, C.,
2021. Integration of Sentinel-1 and ALOS/PALSAR-2 SAR datasets for mapping active
landslides along the Jinsha River corridor, China. Eng. Geol. 284, 106033. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.enggeo.2021.106033 .
Liu, Y., Meng, Z., Zhu, L., Hu, D., He, H., 2023d. Optimizing the sample selection of
machine learning models for landslide susceptibility prediction using information
value models in the dabie mountain area of anhui, China. Sustainability 15 (3), 1971.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su15031971 .
Liu, X., Peng, Y., Lu, Z., Li, W., Yu, J., Ge, D., Xiang, W., 2023c. Feature-Fusion
segmentation network for landslide detection using high-resolution remote sensing
images and digital elevation model data. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Rem. Sens. 61, 1 –14.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2022.3233637
.
Liu, Z., Shao, J., Xu, W., Chen, H., Shi, C., 2014. Comparison on landslide nonlinear
displacement analysis and prediction with computational intelligence approaches.
Landslides 11 (5), 889 –896. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10346-013-0443-z .
Liu, Q., Wu, T., Deng, Y., Liu, Z., 2023b. SE-YOLOv7 landslide detection algorithm based
on attention mechanism and improved loss function. Land 12 (8), 1522. https://
doi.org/10.3390/land12081522 .
Liu, Z., Xu, W., Shao, J., 2012. Gauss process based approach for application on landslide
displacement analysis and prediction. CMES-Comp. Model. Eng. Sci. 84 (2), 99 –122.
Lu, W., Hu, Y., Zhang, Z., Cao, W., 2023. A dual-encoder U-Net for landslide detection
using Sentinel-2 and DEM data. Landslides 20 (9), 1975 –1987. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10346-023-02089-5 .
Lu, X., Miao, F., Xie, X., Li, D., Xie, Y., 2021. A new method for displacement prediction of
"step-like" landslides based on VMD-FOA-SVR model. Environ. Earth Sci. 80 (17).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12665-021-09825-x .R. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
17
Luo, W., Dou, J., Fu, Y., Wang, X., He, Y., Ma, H., Wang, R., Xing, K., 2023. A novel hybrid
LMD-ETS-TCN approach for predicting landslide displacement based on GPS time
series analysis. Rem. Sens. 15 (1), 229. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs15010229 .
Lv, P., Ma, L., Li, Q., Du, F., 2023. ShapeFormer: a shape-enhanced vision transformer
model for optical remote sensing image landslide detection. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl.
Earth Obs. Rem. Sens. 16, 2681 –2689. https://doi.org/10.1109/
JSTARS.2023.3253769 .
Ma, S., Shao, X., Xu, C., 2023. Landslide susceptibility mapping in terms of the slope-unit
or raster-unit, which is better? J. Earth Sci. 34 (2), 386 –397. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s12583-021-1407-1 .
Mandal, K., Saha, S., Mandal, S., 2021. Applying deep learning and benchmark machine
learning algorithms for landslide susceptibility modelling in Rorachu river basin of
Sikkim Himalaya, India. Geosci. Front. 12 (5), 101203. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.gsf.2021.101203 .
Merghadi, A., Yunus, A.P., Dou, J., Whiteley, J., Binh, T., Dieu, T.B., Avtar, R.,
Abderrahmane, B., 2020. Machine learning methods for landslide susceptibility
studies: a comparative overview of algorithm performance. Earth Sci. Rev. 207,
103225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.earscirev.2020.103225 .
Miao, F., Wu, Y., Xie, Y., Li, Y., 2018. Prediction of landslide displacement with step-like
behavior based on multialgorithm optimization and a support vector regression
model. Landslides 15 (3), 475 –488. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10346-017-0883-y .
Miao, H., Yin, K., Xu, F., Liu, B., 2010. Comprehensive evaluation on multiple predictions
of the landslide displacements based on component analysis. J. Wuhan Univ.Technol. 32 (19), 65 –70.https://doi.org/10.3963/j.issn.1671-4431.2010.19.017 .
Nath, N.K., Gautam, V.K., Pande, C.B., Mishra, L.R., Raju, J.T., Moharir, K.N., Rane, N.L.,
2024. Development of landslide susceptibility maps of Tripura, India using GIS and
analytical hierarchy process (AHP). Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 31 (5), 7481 –7497.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-023-31486-5 .
Nava, L., Carraro, E., Reyes-Carmona, C., Puliero, S., Bhuyan, K., Rosi, A., Monserrat, O.,
Floris, M., Meena, S.R., Galve, J.P., Catani, F., 2023. Landslide displacementforecasting using deep learning and monitoring data across selected sites. Landslides
20 (10), 2111 –2129. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10346-023-02104-9 .
Nguyen, V., Pham, B., Vu, B., Prakash, I., Jha, S., Shahabi, H., Shirzadi, A., Ba, D.,
Kumar, R., Chatterjee, J., Tien Bui, D., 2019. Hybrid machine learning approaches for
landslide susceptibility modeling. Forests 10 (2), 157. https://doi.org/10.3390/
f10020157 .
Nichol, J., Wong, M., 2005. Detection and interpretation of landslides using satellite
images. Land Degradation and Development 16, 243 –255. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ldr.648 .
Niu, X., Ma, J., Wang, Y., Zhang, J., Chen, H., Tang, H., 2021. A novel decomposition-
ensemble learning model based on ensemble empirical mode decomposition and
recurrent neural network for landslide displacement prediction. Appl. Sci.-Basel 11(10), 4684. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11104684 .
Ozdemir, A., Altural, T., 2013. A comparative study of frequency ratio, weights of
evidence and logistic regression methods for landslide susceptibility mapping: sultan
Mountains, SW Turkey. J. Asian Earth Sci. 64, 180 –197. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jseaes.2012.12.014 .
Peng, L., Niu, R., Wu, T., 2013. Time series analysis and support vector machine for
landslide displacement prediction. J. Zhejiang Univ. Eng. Sci. 47 (9), 1672 –1679.
https://doi.org/10.3785/j.issn.1008-973X.2013.09.024 .
Phakdimek, S., Komori, D., Chaithong, T., 2023. Combination of optical images and SAR
images for detecting landslide scars, using a classi ﬁcation and regression tree. Int. J.
Rem. Sens. 44 (11), 3572 –3606. https://doi.org/10.1080/01431161.2023.2224096 .
Pourghasemi, H.R., Mohammady, M., Pradhan, B., 2012a. Landslide susceptibility
mapping using index of entropy and conditional probability models in GIS: safarood
Basin, Iran. Catena 97, 71 –84.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2012.05.005 .
Pourghasemi, H.R., Pradhan, B., Gokceoglu, C., 2012b. Application of fuzzy logic and
analytical hierarchy process (AHP) to landslide susceptibility mapping at Haraz
watershed, Iran. Nat. Hazards 63 (2), 965 –996. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-
012-0217-2 .
Pradhan, B., 2013. A comparative study on the predictive ability of the decision tree,
support vector machine and neuro-fuzzy models in landslide susceptibility mapping
using GIS. Comput. Geosci. 51, 350 –365. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cageo.2012.08.023 .
Prakash, N., Manconi, A., Loew, S., 2020. Mapping landslides on EO data: performance of
deep learning models vs. Traditional machine learning models. Rem. Sens. 12 (3),
346. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs12030346 .
Regmi, A.D., Devkota, K.C., Yoshida, K., Pradhan, B., Pourghasemi, H.R., Kumamoto, T.,
Akgun, A., 2014. Application of frequency ratio, statistical index, and weights-of-
evidence models and their comparison in landslide susceptibility mapping in Central
Nepal Himalaya. Arabian J. Geosci. 7 (2), 725 –742. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12517-012-0807-z .
Rosi, A., Tofani, V., Tanteri, L., Tacconi Stefanelli, C., Agostini, A., Catani, F., Casagli, N.,
2018. The new landslide inventory of Tuscany (Italy) updated with PS-InSAR:
geomorphological features and landslide distribution. Landslides 15 (1), 5 –19.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10346-017-0861-4 .
Song, Z., Li, X., Lizarraga, J.J., Zhao, L., Buscarnera, G., 2021. Shallow landslide
triggering in unsaturated vegetated slopes: ef ﬁcient computation of susceptibility
maps. Comput. Geosci. 154, 104826. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cageo.2021.104826 .
Sreelakshmi, S., Vinod Chandra, S.S., 2024. Visual saliency-based landslide identi ﬁcation
using super-resolution remote sensing data. Results Eng 21, 101656. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.rineng.2023.101656 .
Sun, D., Wen, H., Wang, D., Xu, J., 2020. A random forest model of landslide
susceptibility mapping based on hyperparameter optimization using Bayes algorithm.
Geomorphology 362, 107201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geomorph.2020.107201 .Sun, D., Xu, J., Wen, H., Wang, D., 2021. Assessment of landslide susceptibility mapping
based on Bayesian hyperparameter optimization: a comparison between logistic
regression and random forest. Eng. Geol. 281, 105972. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.enggeo.2020.105972 .
Tien Bui, D., Pradhan, B., Lofman, O., Revhaug, I., Dick, O.B., 2012a. Landslide
susceptibility mapping at Hoa Binh province (Vietnam) using an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system and GIS. Comput. Geosci. 45, 199 –211. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cageo.2011.10.031 .
Tien Bui, D., Pradhan, B., Lofman, O., Revhaug, I., Dick, O.B., 2012b. Spatial prediction of
landslide hazards in Hoa Binh province (Vietnam): a comparative assessment of the
efﬁcacy of evidential belief functions and fuzzy logic models. Catena 96, 28 –40.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2012.04.001 .
Tien Bui, D., Shirzadi, A., Shahabi, H., Geertsema, M., Omidvar, E., Clague, J., Thai
Pham, B., Dou, J., Talebpour Asl, D., Bin Ahmad, B., Lee, S., 2019. New ensemble
models for shallow landslide susceptibility modeling in a semi-arid watershed.
Forests 10 (9), 743. https://doi.org/10.3390/f10090743 .
Trinh, T., Luu, B.T., Nguyen, D.H., Le, T.H.T., Pham, S.V., VuongThi, N., 2023. A study of
non-landslide samples and weights for mapping landslide susceptibility usingregression and clustering methods. Earth Sci. Inform. 16 (4), 4009 –4034. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12145-023-01144-y .
Tsangaratos, P., Ilia, I., 2016. Comparison of a logistic regression and Naïve Bayes
classi ﬁer in landslide susceptibility assessments: the in
ﬂuence of models complexity
and training dataset size. Catena 145, 164 –179. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.catena.2016.06.004 .
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, L.,
Polosukhin, I., 2017. Attention is all you need. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 30
(NIPS 2017), 30 .
Wang, C., Zhao, Y., Bai, L., Guo, W., Meng, Q., 2021. Landslide displacement prediction
method based on GA-elman model. Appl. Sci.-Basel 11 (22), 11030. https://doi.org/
10.3390/app112211030 .
Wang, L., Qiao, Y., 2023. Application of optimized CNN algorithm in landslide boundary
detection. J. Meas. Eng. 11 (4), 405 –419. https://doi.org/10.21595/
jme.2023.23401 .
Wang, Y., Fang, Z., Wang, M., Peng, L., Hong, H., 2020a. Comparative study of landslide
susceptibility mapping with different recurrent neural networks. Comput. Geosci.138, 104445. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cageo.2020.104445 .
Wang, Y., Feng, L., Li, S., Ren, F., Du, Q., 2020b. A hybrid model considering spatial
heterogeneity for landslide susceptibility mapping in Zhejiang Province, China.
Catena 188, 104425. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2019.104425 .
Wang, Y., Tang, H., Huang, J., Wen, T., Ma, J., Zhang, J., 2022. A comparative study of
different machine learning methods for reservoir landslide displacement prediction.
Eng. Geol. 298, 106544. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enggeo.2022.106544 .
Wen, T., Tang, H., Wang, Y., Lin, C., Xiong, C., 2017. Landslide displacement prediction
using the GA-LSSVM model and time series analysis: a case study of Three Gorges
Reservoir, China. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 17 (12), 2181 –2198. https://doi.org/
10.5194/nhess-17-2181-2017 .
Xi, N., Yang, Q., Sun, Y., Mei, G., 2023. Machine learning approaches for slope
deformation prediction based on monitored time-series displacement data: a
comparative investigation. Appl. Sci.-Basel 13 (8), 4677. https://doi.org/10.3390/
app13084677 .
Xie, P., Zhou, A., ChaI, B., 2019. The application of long short-term memory(LSTM)
method on displacement prediction of multifactor-induced landslides. IEEE Access 7,
54305 –54311. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2912419 .
Xing, Y., Huang, S., Yue, J., Chen, Y., Xie, W., Wang, P., Xiang, Y., Peng, Y., 2023. Patterns
of inﬂuence of different landslide boundaries and their spatial shapes on the
uncertainty of landslide susceptibility prediction. Nat. Hazards 118 (1), 709 –727.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-023-06025-7 .
Xing, Y., Yue, J., Chen, C., Cong, K., Zhu, S., Bian, Y., 2019. Dynamic displacement
forecasting of dashuitian landslide in China using variational mode decompositionand stack long short-term memory network. Appl. Sci.-Basel 9 (15), 2951. https://
doi.org/10.3390/app9152951 .
Xing, Y., Yue, J., Chen, C., 2020. Interval estimation of landslide displacement prediction
based on time series decomposition and long short-term memory network. IEEE
Access 8, 3187 –3196. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2961295 .
Xu, Q., Zhao, B., Dai, K., Dong, X., Li, W., Zhu, X., Yang, Y., Xiao, X., Wang, X., Huang, J.,
Lu, H., Deng, B., Ge, D., 2023. Remote sensing for landslide investigations: a progress
report from China. Eng. Geol. 321, 107156. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.enggeo.2023.107156 .
Xu, S., Niu, R., 2018. Displacement prediction of Baijiabao landslide based on empirical
mode decomposition and long short-term memory neural network in Three Gorges
area, China. Comput. Geosci. 111, 87 –96.https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cageo.2017.10.013 .
Yang, X., Fan, X., Wang, K., Zhou, Z., 2024c. Research on landslide susceptibility
prediction model based on LSTM-RF-MDBN. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 31 (1),
1504 –1516. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-023-31232-x .
Yang, B., Guo, Z., Wang, L., He, J., Xia, B., Vakily, S., 2023. Updated global navigation
satellite system observations and attention-based convolutional neural network –long
short-term memory network deep learning algorithms to predict landslide
spatiotemporal displacement. Rem. Sens. 15 (20), 4971. https://doi.org/10.3390/
rs15204971 .
Yang, J., Huang, Z., Jian, W., Robledo, L.F., 2024b. Landslide displacement prediction by
using Bayesian optimization –temporal convolutional networks. Acta Geotech.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11440-023-02205-8 .
Yang, B., Yin, K., Lacasse, S., Liu, Z., 2019. Time series analysis and long short-term
memory neural network to predict landslide displacement. Landslides 16 (4),
677–694. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10346-018-01127-x .R. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
18
Yang, C., Yin, Y., Zhang, J., Ding, P., Liu, J., 2024a. A graph deep learning method for
landslide displacement prediction based on global navigation satellite system
positioning. Geosci. Front. 15 (1), 101690. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.gsf.2023.101690 .
Yi, Y., Xu, X., Xu, G., Gao, H., 2023a. Landslide detection using time-series InSAR method
along the kangding-batang section of shanghai-nyalam road. Rem. Sens. 15 (5), 1452.https://doi.org/10.3390/rs15051452 .
Yi, Y., Xu, X., Xu, G., Gao, H., 2023b. Rapid mapping of slow-moving landslides using an
automated SAR processing platform (HyP3) and stacking-InSAR method. Rem. Sens.
15 (6), 1611. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs15061611 .
Yi, Y., Zhang, Z., Zhang, W., Jia, H., Zhang, J., 2020. Landslide susceptibility mapping
using multiscale sampling strategy and convolutional neural network: a case study in
Jiuzhaigou region. Catena 195, 104851. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.catena.2020.104851 .
Youssef, A.M., Pourghasemi, H.R., Pourtaghi, Z.S., Al-Katheeri, M.M., 2016. Landslide
susceptibility mapping using random forest, boosted regression tree, classi ﬁcation
and regression tree, and general linear models and comparison of their performance
at Wadi Tayyah Basin, Asir Region, Saudi Arabia. Landslides 13 (5), 839 –856.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10346-015-0614-1 .
Youssef, A.M., Pourghasemi, H.R., 2021. Landslide susceptibility mapping using machine
learning algorithms and comparison of their performance at Abha Basin, Asir Region,
Saudi Arabia. Geosci. Front. 12 (2), 639 –655. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.gsf.2020.05.010 .
Zeng, T., Glade, T., Xie, Y., Yin, K., Peduto, D., 2023. Deep learning powered long-term
warning systems for reservoir landslides. Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduc. 94, 103820.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2023.103820 .
Zeng, T., Jiang, H., Liu, Q., Yin, K., 2022. Landslide displacement prediction based on
Variational mode decomposition and MIC-GWO-LSTM model. Stoch. Environ. Res.
Risk Assess. 36 (5), 1353 –1372. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00477-021-02145-3 .
Zhang, Y., Tang, J., Liao, R., Zhang, M., Zhang, Y., Wang, X., Su, Z., 2021d. Application of
an enhanced BP neural network model with water cycle algorithm on landslide
prediction. Stoch. Environ. Res. Risk Assess. 35 (6), 1273 –1291. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00477-020-01920-y .
Zhang, J., Tang, H., Tannant, D.D., Lin, C., Xia, D., Liu, X., Zhang, Y., Ma, J., 2021a.
Combined forecasting model with CEEMD-LCSS reconstruction and the ABC-SVRmethod for landslide displacement prediction. J. Clean. Prod. 293, 126205. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126205 .Zhang, J., Tang, H., Wen, T., Ma, J., Tan, Q., Xia, D., Liu, X., Zhang, Y., 2020. A hybrid
landslide displacement prediction method based on CEEMD and DTW-ACO-SVR-
cases studied in the three gorges reservoir area. Sensors 20 (15), 4287. https://
doi.org/10.3390/s20154287 .
Zhang, J., Huang, S., 2009. Relationship between landslide displacement and
precipitation. Journal of Geomatics 34 (3), 27 –29.
Zhang, R., Zhu, W., Li, Z., Zhang, B., Chen, B., 2024. Re-net: multibranch network with
structural reparameterization for landslide detection in optical imagery. IEEE J. Sel.
Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Rem. Sens. 17, 2828 –2837. https://doi.org/10.1109/
JSTARS.2023.3344720 .
Zhang, W., Li, Y., Li, X., Kang, Q., 2013. Forecasting of landslide displacement based on
exponential smoothing and nonlinear regression analysis. Applied Mechanics and
Materials, 353-356, 1101 –1105. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scienti ﬁc
.net/AMM.353-356.1101 .
Zhang, X., Zhu, C., He, M., Dong, M., Zhang, G., Zhang, F., 2022. Failure mechanism and
long short-term memory neural network model for landslide risk prediction. Rem.
Sens. 14 (1), 166. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs14010166 .
Zhang, L., Shi, B., Zhu, H., Yu, X.B., Han, H., Fan, X., 2021b. PSO-SVM-based deep
displacement prediction of Majiagou landslide considering the deformation
hysteresis effect. Landslides 18 (1), 179 –193.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10346-020-
01426-2 .
Zhang, Y., Tang, J., He, Z., Tan, J., Li, C., 2021c. A novel displacement prediction method
using gated recurrent unit model with time series analysis in the Erdaohe landslide.Nat. Hazards 105 (1), 783 –813. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-020-04337-6 .
Zhang, Y., Wang, X., Tang, H., 2019. An improved Elman neural network with piecewise
weighted gradient for time series prediction. Neurocomputing 359, 199 –208. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2019.06.001 .
Zhao, Y., Niu, R., Li, J., Peng, L., Wang, Y., 2013. Prediction of landslide displacement
based on kernel principal component analysis and neural network-Markov chain.
Adv. Mater. Res. 726-731, 1512 –1520. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scienti ﬁc
.net/AMR.726-731.1512 .
Zhou, J., Tan, S., Li, J., Xu, J., Wang, C., Ye, H., 2023. Landslide susceptibility assessment
using the analytic hierarchy process (ahp): a case study of a construction site for
photovoltaic power generation in yunxian county, southwest China. Sustainability 15
(6), 5281. https://doi.org/10.3390/su15065281 .
Zhu, X., Ma, S., Xu, Q., Liu, W., 2018. A WD-GA-LSSVM model for rainfall-triggered
landslide displacement prediction. J. Mt. Sci. 15 (1), 156 –166. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11629-016-4245-3 .R. He et al. Rock Mechanics Bulletin 3 (2024) 100144
19
